{\rtf1\ansi\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0 \fswiss Helvetica;}{\f1 Courier;}}
{\colortbl;\red255\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;}
\widowctrl\hyphauto

{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Mapping Literacy\par}
{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0  Lesson Plan\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Class learning objectives\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Students will become familiar with web maps as a scholarly resource and will be able to read them critically. They will learn the grammar common to maps.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Connection to course learning objectives\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Before students can create maps they need to understand what kinds of maps are worth creating. This lesson aims to create student interest in mapping.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Before class: student tasks\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Identify one map (perhaps excluding Google Maps, Bing Maps, MapQuest, etc.) that the student has used in the past month.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Before class: instructor tasks\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Identify a handful of maps, preferably some within and some outside of the course content. These amps should contain some positive and some negative examples.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Hook\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Option 1: Ask several students to demo the maps that they have brought to class. (Or, this could be part of the interaction/practice.)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Option 2: Demonstrate a scholarly map which illustrates themes in the course content.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Nineteenth-century U.S. history: {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://dsl.richmond.edu/emancipation/"}}{\fldrslt{\ul
Visualizing Emancipation
}}}
\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Twentieth-century U.S. history: {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://digitalharlem.org/"}}{\fldrslt{\ul
Digital Harlem
}}}
\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Early modern literature: {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://mapoflondon.uvic.ca/"}}{\fldrslt{\ul
Map of Early Modern London
}}}
\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Twentieth-century literature: {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://mrsdallowaymappingproject.weebly.com/"}}{\fldrslt{\ul
Mrs. Dalloway Mapping Project
}}}
 or {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.briancroxall.net/dh/assignments/mapping-mrs-dalloway/"}}{\fldrslt{\ul
Mapping Mrs. Dalloway
}}}
\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Religious studies: {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://maps.umn.edu/HousesofWorship/housesofworship.html"}}{\fldrslt{\ul
Houses of Worship in Minneapolis and St. Paul, 1849\u8211-1924
}}}
\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Classics: {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://orbis.stanford.edu/"}}{\fldrslt{\ul
ORBIS
}}}
\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Chinese History: {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://songgis.ucmerced.edu/"}}{\fldrslt{\ul
Digital Gazetteer of the Song Dynasty
}}}
\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Politics: {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2014/11/04/upshot/senate-maps.html"}}{\fldrslt{\ul
The Most Detailed Maps You'll See from the Midterm Elections
}}}
\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Demo/Introduction\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Depending on the map chosen, ask students to identify its key features.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab What argument does this map make?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab How does it communicate its argument?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab What do you have to know in advance to understand this map?\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Interaction/practice\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 In small groups, students will explore at least two interactive maps. They will try to answer the same questions as above.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Points to get across\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 1.\tx360\tab Maps work by aligning multiple sources of information to a spatial grid.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 2.\tx360\tab Maps are a representation of reality not the reality itself.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 3.\tx360\tab Maps are powerfully persuasive, but must be read critically.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Depending on which map is chosen, you may wish to make a point about the discipline-specific content.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Assessment\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The effectiveness of this lesson will be determined by how critically students read maps in future weeks.\par}
}
