{\rtf1\ansi\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0 \fswiss Helvetica;}{\f1 Courier;}}
{\colortbl;\red255\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;}
\widowctrl\hyphauto

{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Deep Maps\par}
{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0  Lesson Plan\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Class learning objectives\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 A deep map will require several class periods; it might even be the centerpiece of a course. Still, each class should have a theme, corresponding to a perspective or layer of the deep map. For instance, one class might work on creating a layer for government data; another class might work on locating quotations from literature in space; a third might place photographs on the map.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Connection to course learning objectives\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 In one sense, creating the deep map might be the class learning objective: through creating it, students will gain a sense of place. But the deep map should immerse students some subject in your discipline as researchers.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Before class: student tasks\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Before each class, students should be asked to gather materials for the deep map.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Preparatory readings (e.g., Cresswell) should introduce the concept of place. The {\i Hypercities} book may also be useful.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Before class: instructor tasks\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Arrange for an installation of Omeka and Neatline\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab What layers should the deep map include?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Where can students find materials?\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Hook\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 To introduce the concept of a deep map, ask students to draw a detailed map of the town and college that they are in. The map will be inaccurate in terms of space, but revealing in terms of place. They should share maps with several other students to get a sense of how widely perspectives vary on the same place.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Demo/Introduction\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 A deep map is difficult to demo. You may wish to find other deep maps to explore, even if they are not about the course content.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Omeka and Neatline should also be demoed:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab How to log in\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab How to create an item\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab How to add metadata to an item\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab How to add an item to Neatline\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab How to add different kinds of markers in Neatline\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab How to create an Omeka exhibit\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Interaction/practice\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Students may work on the deep map together in class, perhaps just one day a week. At the very least, students should have time each class period to make decisions about the map and to reflect on its progress..\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Potential pitfalls\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Too innumerable to mention. But the potential problems can fall into two groups. First, the deep map may be poorly conceived, most likely because it takes on a subject with inadequate sources accessible to students. Problems of implementation are likely to crop up often, but they are not as troublesome as in a single class assignment, provided that you have alloted time to making decisions about the map.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Assessment\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Assessing group projects is very difficult. Students should mark their contributions (as "contributor") in Omeka, and the instructor should provide some guidelines As to the quantity and quality\par}
}
