{\rtf1\ansi\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0 \fswiss Helvetica;}{\f1 Courier;}}
{\colortbl;\red255\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;}
\widowctrl\hyphauto

{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Narrative Maps\par}
{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0  Lesson Plan\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Class learning objectives\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Students will learn to think spatially about a text relevant to the course. Students will also learn how to construct a narrative that takes space into account.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Connection to course learning objectives\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The text, chosen by students or the instructor, will be about the course content. The connection to the course content will be even stronger if the students learn to\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Before class: student tasks\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Students will need to sign up for a Google Account.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Students may need to select a text.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Students will need to prepare a list of the places mentioned in their texts, with corresponding page numbers or citations so they can look them up again. They should also begin to gather relevant images.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Before class: instructor tasks\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab The instructor may need to assign texts to students, or at least prepare a list of texts for students to choose from.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab The instructor may need to assign students to groups.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab The instructor will need to provide instructions on how to find places within the text.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Hook\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The beginning of class should reveal how text the class has already read has a previously unnoticed spatial component.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Demo/Introduction\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The instructor can create a minimal (two or three slide) narrative map in class using a text that the class has already read. The aim is to demonstrate the tool, how to find places in the text, and how to make decisions about what to include and exclude from the narrative.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Interaction/practice\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Students will begin to create their narrative maps in class.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Points to get across\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab One has to read a text considering it spatially.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Specific points about the importance of space for particular texts in the course.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Comparison of how space matters differently for each of the texts that the students chose.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Potential pitfalls\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Students may come to class without a Google account. Working in groups can mitigate this problem.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Students may not have prepared the spatial information about their source.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Assessment\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Excellent work will apply thinking about space to other texts read in class.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Good work will identify all the places in a text, and explain how place is used within a narrative or argumentative framework.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Adequate work will merely identify the places in a text.\sa180\par}
}
