{\rtf1\ansi\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0 \fswiss Helvetica;}{\f1 Courier;}}
{\colortbl;\red255\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;}
\widowctrl\hyphauto

{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Data Maps\par}
{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0  Lesson Plan\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Class learning objectives\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Students will use a data set and CartoDB to explore big picture trends in the course content. Students will also learn how to create a map for exploratory data analysis.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Example for an art class: Students will examine the distributions of paintings from different schools over space and time.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Example for an English class: Students will examine the publication locations and dates of a corpus of texts. Or, students will examine the locations depicted in a corpus of texts.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Example for U.S. history class: Students will use Census data to explore patterns of people of different races and places of nativity were distributed across the United States during the Gilded Age.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Connection to course learning objectives\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 This assignment would be well placed either at the beginning or end of a unit, either to introduce or to sum up the larger points made in that unit. The aim is to have students discover (or rediscover) the course material for themselves.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Before class: student tasks\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Before class students might be asked to read a introductory article or essay that approaches.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Students should sign up for an account on CartoDB and read the introductory documentation.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Before class: instructor tasks\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Prepare the data set, including (possibly) joining the spatial data to quantitative data so that students do not have to, and deciding which variables are worth exploring. The data set should probably be a subset of the complete data in order to direct students to the most likely discoveries.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Prepare a sample map to demonstrate how to create a map and to interpret it.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Practice demonstrating CartodDB.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Prepare a list of questions that could possibly be answered by the data.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Hook & demo\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The in-class demonstration of CartoDB should reveal/visualize some pattern that has previously been explained in lectures or readings.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The main points things to explain about CartoDB:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab How to upload data\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab How to plot points or polygons) on the map\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab How to map the aesthetics of the map to variables in the data\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Which aesthetics are most likely to provide useful representations\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Interaction/practice\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Students will spend a large part of the class working in groups to create their own maps of the data set. They will try out different variables/aesthetics in order to answer a course\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Points to get across\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Potential pitfalls\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Students may not have a CartoDB account or may experience some difficulty with it. (Working in groups can help lessen this risk.)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Students may have difficulty in connecting the maps to the themes of the course.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Assessment\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Excellent work will answer more than one of the questions posed by using the maps, noting where they are persuasive and where they are limited, and connecting the maps to other kinds of evidence.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Good work will prepare a map that answers one of the questions and connects to the larger themes of the course. Very good work will make comparisons between maps of different variables.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Adequate work will create a map but may have difficulty connecting the map to the questions posed.\sa180\par}
}
