{\rtf1\ansi\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0 \fswiss Helvetica;}{\f1 Courier;}}
{\colortbl;\red255\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;}
\widowctrl\hyphauto

{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Georectification\par}
{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0  Lesson Plan\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Class learning objectives\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Students will learn how to read historical maps as sources, and will note how places changed over time.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Connection to course learning objectives\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 This project should serve as a reference tool for the course readings. These georectified maps may also be a component of a deep map.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab A literature class might create a set of maps for a place described in the works read in a class.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab A history class might create a set of georectified maps showing how the places studied changed over the course of the period covered by the class.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Before class: student tasks\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Identify a map to be georectified from the David Rumsey collection (or other suitable collection)\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Before class: instructor tasks\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Identify maps to be georectified (if students are not being asked to do so)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Practice georectification with a map that can be warped with only three or four control points.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Prepare questions to be asked after georectifying a map (see interaction/practice)\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Hook\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Students should be given a sense of ownership over their group's maps, so they feel an obligation to the larger class project.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Demo/Introduction\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Point to get across in the demonstration:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab The basic theory behind georectification (perhaps using Ben Schmidt's subway maps)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab How to add control points\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab How to warp the map\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab How and where to add more control points to fix a poorly warped map\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab How to export the map\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Interaction/practice\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Students may work in groups on different maps of the same place (e.g., as chronological layers for a place) or different maps from adjacent places (e.g., different neighborhoods in a city, or states in a country). The goal is to put together the work of the different groups to create a class project that is larger than the whole, and which can be referred to throughout the class.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Students should also be asked to provide interpretations of the georectified map. Sample questions:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab What has changed? What has stayed the same?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab What point was the mapmaker trying to make? What information was the mapmaker trying to provide? Does georectification illuminate how the mapmaker constructed place?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab What places can you identify on the georectified map (e.g., towns, boundaries, buildings)?\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Points to get across\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab How georectified maps shows change over time\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab How comparing a contemporary map and a historical map demonstrate the constructed nature of both\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Potential pitfalls\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Some maps just don't rectify well.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab If asked to chose their own maps, students may not be able to find one on their chosen topic.\sa180\par}
}
