---
layout: page
title: Workshops
...

### Introduction to Mapping and Spatial History

[Doing Digital History][], NEH-ODH Summer Institute, George Mason
University, August 11, 2014

<div class="abstract">

Most of this workshop was hands on, but the [slides and notes][] from
the introductory session are available.

</div>

### Data Analysis for Humanists

[THATCamp American Historical Association 2014][], Washington, January
5, 2014

[THATCamp American Academy of Religion 2013][], Baltimore, November 22,
2013

<div class="abstract">

Humanities scholars now have access to a range of data sets and
techniques for analyzing them that were previously regarded as the
province of scholars in other disciplines. Three kinds of data analysis
are common in academic research: mapping, text mining, and quantitative
analysis. In this workshop, we'll try our hands at all three, using data
sets of interest to scholars of religion. We will make maps from the
missions of the Paulist Fathers, do some quantitative analysis of
religious demographic data, and mine the texts of the Oxford Movement's
*Tracts for the Times*. By bringing these common kinds of data analysis
together, we will learn the basic practices and theories which underlie
all of them. Of course we will have occasion to discuss what data
analysis means from a humanistic perspective.

During this workshop we will get hands-on with the [statistical
programming language R][]. While there are many tools to make maps, mine
texts, and analyze numbers, R is especially powerful because it can
perform all of these types of analysis. R is a favorite tool of
academics, Google, and the New York Times, so it has strong support. You
are encouraged to [install R][] (the programming language itself) and
the desktop version of [R Studio][] (a tool to help you use R) in
advance. Self-starters can watch some of [Google's video introductions
to R][] to acquire the basics. While you will benefit from learning some
of the theory behind the analysis even without using R, there is no
substitute for performing the analysis yourself, and you'll pick up the
basics of a powerful digital humanities tool.

</div>

### How to Use a Database for Historical Research

[THATCamp New England 2013][], University of Connecticut at Storrs,
October 18, 2013.

<div class="abstract">

This workshop will investigate the intellectual problem of how to create
a database for historical research. By database, we don't mean a
commercial database from which one finds primary sources, but rather a
database that is an intellectual model of one's research. The workshop
will have two parts. In the first part, we will discuss the form of the
database and the problem of how to model historical research. We will
address such questions as, What is a database? What fields should my
database have? How do I represent uncertainty in a database? How do I
cite my sources? The second part of the workshop will deal with the
question of how to make a historical argument from a database. We will
address such questions as, How do I get my data out of the database and
into a usable form? How do I make maps and charts from my data? How do I
deal with the perennial historian's problem of selection?

For the hands-on part, we will use Omeka and the universe of tools
surrounding it. People planning to attend this workshop are encouraged
to sign up for an account at [Omeka.net][] and investigate the following
online databases created by historians in the course of their research:

-   [American Converts Database][]
-   [Papers of the War Department][]
-   [Neatline demos][]

Advanced users who are comfortable with programming languages may wish
to download the latest version of the [Omeka Client Ruby gem][].

</div>

### The Humanist's Operating System; or, Scholarship in Plain Text

[THATCamp New England 2012][], Brown University, October 20, 2012.

<div class="abstract">

An operating system is the most basic software on a computer, which
allows the computer run higher order applications. Scholars also need an
'operating system'---a set of basic tools that work together reliably to
handle the low level tasks of scholarship so scholars can concentrate on
higher order thinking. We will begin this workshop by drawing some ideas
from the philosophy of the Unix operating system, especially the idea
that (almost) all scholarly work can be done in plain text. We will then
experiment with Unix-style tools that can be used on any computer
operating system. We will spend most of the workshop trying out the
components of a plain-text scholarly operating system, including text
editors ([take your pick][]), plain-text markup ([Markdown][]), document
converters ([Pandoc][] with a nod to [LaTeX][]), and version control
([Git][]). Along the way we will also learn the basics of interacting
with a computer through a command line.

Participants will get more out of the workshop if they install
[Pandoc][1] and a good text editor ([TextWrangler][] on Mac,
[Notepad++][] on Windows) before the session. The links above to
ProfHacker posts may also be helpful.

</div>

  [Doing Digital History]: http://history2014.doingdh.org/
  [slides and notes]: /downloads/pdf/spatial-history.doing-dh.pdf
  [THATCamp American Historical Association 2014]: http://aha2014.thatcamp.org/
  [THATCamp American Academy of Religion 2013]: http://aar2013.thatcamp.org/
  [statistical programming language R]: http://www.r-project.org/
  [install R]: http://cran.rstudio.com/
  [R Studio]: http://www.rstudio.com/ide/download/desktop
  [Google's video introductions to R]: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iffR3fWv4xw&list=PLOU2XLYxmsIK9qQfztXeybpHvru-TrqAP
  [THATCamp New England 2013]: http://newengland2013.thatcamp.org/
  [Omeka.net]: http://omeka.net
  [American Converts Database]: http://americanconverts.org
  [Papers of the War Department]: http://wardepartmentpapers.org/
  [Neatline demos]: http://neatline.org/neatline-in-action/
  [Omeka Client Ruby gem]: https://rubygems.org/gems/omeka_client
  [THATCamp New England 2012]: http://newengland2012.thatcamp.org/
  [take your pick]: http://chronicle.com/blogs/profhacker/writing-power-tools-text-editors/38940
  [Markdown]: http://chronicle.com/blogs/profhacker/markdown-the-syntax-you-probably-already-know/35295
  [Pandoc]: http://chronicle.com/blogs/profhacker/pandoc-converts-all-your-text-documents/38700
  [LaTeX]: http://chronicle.com/blogs/profhacker/getting-started-with-latex/23092
  [Git]: http://chronicle.com/blogs/profhacker/a-gentle-introduction-to-version-control/23064
  [1]: http://johnmacfarlane.net/pandoc/
  [TextWrangler]: http://www.barebones.com/products/TextWrangler/
  [Notepad++]: http://notepad-plus-plus.org/
