---
layout: post
comments: true
title: "Review of <em>The Metaphysical Club</em>"
categories:
- book-reviews
tags:
- reviews
- pragmatism
- William James
- Louis Menand
- history
---

**Menand, Louis. _The Metaphysical Club_. New York: Farrar, Straus, and
Giroux, 2001. 546 pages. ISBN: 0374528497.**

<!--more-->

Most self-described intellectuals have joined a discussion club at some
time or another. Though a few intellectual clubs have left their mark,
such as the Holy Club of John and Charles Wesley or the Inklings of C.
S. Lewis and J. R. R. Tolkein, most groups disband, leaving behind few
records and even less influence. Scarcely any informal gathering of
intelligentsia can claim to have promulgated a new philosophy that
remade a nation.

But that influence is what Louis Menand claims for the Metaphysical
Club, a gathering of intellectuals in Cambridge, Massachusetts, in 1872.
Started by Chauncey Wright, a brilliant, talkative, but shiftless
philosopher of science, the club claimed as members Oliver Wendell
Holmes Jr., William James, and Charles Sanders Peirce, among others.
Their name was a joke, though a bitter one, for the members all hated
metaphysics. The record of the club is scanty—it is mentioned only in a
letter by James and an unpublished work by Peirce—and its life short,
but from that circle of thinkers originated pragmatism. By his title
Menand means not just the club proper but all the connections among the
pragmatists. For example, the fourth member of the broader club is John
Dewey, who was a boy in New Hampshire during the club’s existence but
who later showed the influence of pragmatism.

The idea that a club of intellectuals could have such broad influence is
thrilling (at least, for intellectuals), but Menand traces their
influence back to a more fundamental and pervasive cause: the Civil War.
Though the Civil War caused few changes in government compared to, say,
the English Civil War, it did give rise to the new philosophy of
pragmatism. Menand’s thesis is that in shattering the lives of
Americans, the Civil War shattered not just the ideas that provoked the
war but the very idea of what ideas are.

Pragmatism’s definition is familiar, and in defining it Menand does not
break any new ground. The Civil War proved to pragmatists that ideas can
fail, and had. Only ideas that worked, as judged by society, could claim
to be true. To put it metaphysically, as the pragmatists would not,
ideas have no independent ontological reality; to quote Menand, “Ideas
are not ‘out there’ waiting to be discovered, but are tools—like forks
and knives and microchips—that people devise to cope with the world in
which they find themselves” (xi).

Menand’s genius is his ability to explain pragmatism though biography.
Most of the book describes the lives of Holmes, James, Peirce, and
Dewey. Each is the subject of a major section of the book; only the last
section deals topically with pragmatism’s implications. Menand describes
a host of other thinkers too: Ralph Waldo Emerson, Chauncey Wright,
Louis Agassiz, Learned Hand, W. E. B. DuBois, and Franz Boas, to name
just a few. He argues implicitly that pragmatism cannot be understood
apart from the lives of the pragmatists. Menand’s method fits the
pragmatists, for they thought ideas were not higher metaphysical reality
but a means of managing life.

Menand’s sketch of Holmes is perhaps his best, and so it is a suitable
example of his method. Holmes rejected the anti-abolitionism of his
father and broke Harvard College’s regulations so that he could join the
Union Army—he volunteered to serve an idea. That idea produced horrific
consequences, however, as Holmes experienced war’s suffering. Holmes’s
friend Henry Livermore Abbott proved his valor despite being an open
Copperhead, and Holmes concluded that one could do his duty divorced
from his ideas. Menand brilliantly reconstructs how Holmes reconsidered
his philosophy in a hospital after being wounded at Ball’s Bluff; Holmes
concluded that he needed no religion and forsook his former beliefs.
Holmes was reacting against the war but also against transcendentalism
and abolitionism—the ideas that caused it. Menand concludes, “The lesson
Holmes took from the war can be put in a sentence. It is that certitude
leads to violence” (61). Holmes famously wrote, “In our youths, our
hearts were touched with fire,” and Menand has showed how.

Menand demonstrates how the lives of the other philosophers provoked
their philosophies too. He marshals in support such disparate episodes
as James’s expedition to Brazil with celebrity scientists Louis Agassiz,
Peirce’s testimony about probability in a cause célèbre over a forged
will, and Dewey’s struggles with New Hampshire transcendentalism and
Hegelianism. Since Holmes was the only one who fought in the Civil War,
Menand’s connection between war and the Metaphysical Club is clearest
with him, but he extends the connection to his other three main subjects
too.

Pragmatism influenced many fields, but Menand seems to cover them all.
In discussing Supreme Court justice Holmes, Menand explains the
influences of his philosophy on his jurisprudence. Holmes argued that
law was not what judges discover but what judges make it. Holmes thus
tried to preserve individuals’ right, lest the certitude of any group
destroy the nation. He also favored judicial restraint, on the theory
that judges could be no more certain of justice than the legislatures. A
large part of Menand’s book is given to discussing science and
mathematics. He finds mathematical principles of statistics and
probability, such as the law of errors, to have been an important
influence on Pierce’s pragmatism. Another area that science influenced
was racism. Menand’s explanations of the different theories of
monogenism and polygenism and how evolution led to racism are among the
more enlightening parts of his book. Menand also touches on religion in
relation to James’s famous *The Varieties of Religious Experience*,
education in relation to Dewey’s attempts at educational reform, and
academic freedom in relation to Dewey’s involvement with the American
Association of University Professors.

If any criticism can be made of Menand’s work, it is that his
pragmatists are too similar. I do not mean that his biographical
sketches are the same—they are all masterful—but that his pragmatists
hold essentially similar philosophies. Their similarities, however, did
not preclude philosophical differences. Menand points out, for example,
that James was willing to give place to religion so long as that idea
worked for the individual, but Holmes could make no room for religion.
What Menand does not point out is that Dewey had real differences with
Holmes, James, and Peirce: first, he never completely shook off his
early Hegelianism, and second, he lived so much longer into the
twentieth century than the others that he was subjected to a great many
different influences.

But to pursue this criticism too far is to mistake Menand’s purpose.
Menand never purports to offer a nuanced philosophical discussion of
pragmatism (and the reader is doubtless grateful). Rather he seeks to
explain historically how the Civil War changed how Americans thought
about ideas. At that he has succeeded.

