---
layout: post
comments: true
category: Book reviews
title: "The Cultural History of American Fundamentalism: A Review Essay"
---

**Bendroth, Margaret Lamberts. <em>Fundamentalists in the City: Conflict
and Division in Boston’s Churches, 1885-1950</em>. New York: Oxford
University Press, 2005.**

**Carpenter, Joel A. <em>Revive Us Again: The Reawakening of American
Fundamentalism</em>. New York: Oxford University Press, 1997.**

**Larson, Edward J. <em>Summer for the Gods: The Scopes Trial and
America’s Continuing Debate Over Science and Religion</em>. New York:
Basic Books, 1997.**

**Marsden, George M. <em>Fundamentalism and American Culture</em>. 2nd ed.
New York: Oxford University Press, 2006.**

**Watt, David Harrington. <em>A Transforming Faith: Explorations of
Twentieth-Century American Evangelicalism</em>. New Brunswick, NJ:
Rutgers University Press, 1991.**

<!--more-->

In 1980 George Marsden published *Fundamentalism and American Culture*,
a history of the first decades of American fundamentalism. The book
quickly rose to prominence in the historical profession, provoking new
studies of American fundamentalism and contributing to a renewal of
interest in American religious history. The book’s timing was fortunate,
for it was published as a resurgent fundamentalism was becoming active
in politics and society. The rise of the Christian right provoked the
question: where did the movement come from?[^1]


[^1]: George M. Marsden, *Fundamentalism and American Culture*, 2nd ed.
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2006).

The historical interpretation of fundamentalism that was then current
could not provide an adequate answer. In the standard narrative,
fundamentalism was a reaction by late nineteenth- and early
twentieth-century evangelical Christians against modernizations in
American society, such as industrialization, Darwin’s theory of
evolution, and changes in popular mores. Fundamentalists resented
modernization because it clashed with their out-of-date worldview and
literal faith in the Bible and Christian doctrine. Within the American
denominations, fundamentalists fought modernists in losing battles over
doctrines such as the inspiration of the Bible, the creation of the
world, and the virgin birth of Jesus, but fundamentalists were
eventually driven from their denominations in defeat. Fundamentalists
also mounted a bid to retain control of American society, most notably
through laws prohibiting the teaching of evolution in public schools.
Their attempt was soundly defeated and ridiculed at the 1925 Scopes
trial. After the trial, fundamentalists were demoralized and in retreat,
sufficiently marginalized that they could never again make a serious
effort to control the nation. By defining fundamentalism as a reaction
against modernism, the standard narrative implicitly predicted that
fundamentalism would disappear as the United States completed
modernizing.

When fundamentalism reappeared in the 1970s, the flaws in that
interpretation were revealed. In its place, a new body of historical
work, including Marsden’s book, redefined fundamentalism not as
evangelicalism reacting against modernism, but as evangelicalism
adopting modernism. The first historian to make this argument was Ernest
R. Sandeen in *The Roots of Fundamentalism*. Sandeen saw fundamentalism
as a movement descended from American and British evangelicalism with
the additions of dispensationalist eschatology and an explicit
definition of the verbal inspiration of the Bible. George Marsden
expanded on Sandeen’s definition by unpacking the significance of those
additions. Dispensationalism divided history and biblical prophecy into
a series of eras, or dispensations—a type of scientific classification.
By defining biblical inspiration as extending to the very words of
Scripture, fundamentalists created a new hermeneutic which treated the
Bible as a source of data to be mined and scientifically analyzed.
Marsden further observed that fundamentalism added borrowings from the
Holiness movement and from Scottish commonsense realism.[^2]

[^2]: Ernest R.  Sandeen, *The Roots of Fundamentalism: British and American
Millenarianism, 1800-1930* (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1970);
Marsden, *Fundamentalism and American Culture*, 16-18, 43-71, 80-100,
102-22. Marsden’s helpful definitions of the terms *fundamentalism* and
*evangelicalism* and their varying usage over time are on pages 234-35.
Fundamentalists themselves have put much effort into defining their
movement, for example, David O. Beale, *In Pursuit of Purity: American
Fundamentalism Since 1850* (Greenville, SC: Unusual Publications, 1986),
3-12. These definitions tend to be normative rather than descriptive.

The implications of Marsden’s redefinition were radical. He revealed
that fundamentalism was not rural, Southern, and pre-modernist, but
rather urban, often Northern, and aggressively modern. Its relationship
to modernism led to a paradox in fundamentalists’ identity. On the one
hand, fundamentalists identified as heirs to the Protestant
establishment of the nineteenth century. On the other hand, they saw
themselves as displaced from power by a new modernism, though partaking
of what they found desirable in it. Marsden’s explication of this
paradox had great power to explain fundamentalism’s struggle to control
the United States at the same time that they felt alienated from it.
Even though Marsden ended his book in the 1930s, his thesis could
explain how fundamentalism, moribund after the Scopes trial, could rise
again in the 1970s.[^3]

[^3]:Marsden, *Fundamentalism and American Culture*,
6-8.

Joel Carpenter extended the history of fundamentalism beyond the 1930s
in his book *Revive Us Again*. Carpenter agreed with Marsden that
fundamentalism was not merely a reaction against modernism. Carpenter’s
insight was that fundamentalists’ defeat at the Scopes trial did not
necessarily mean that fundamentalism retreated after the 1930s. Rather,
Carpenter looked at how fundamentalists created their own network of
extra-denominational institutions, most notably Bible colleges that
turned out thousands of pastors, evangelists, and missionaries. Also
important in linking fundamentalists together were publishing houses,
radio shows, and Bible and prophecy conferences. In one sense the
creation of these networks was a retreat, because fundamentalists
increasingly withdrew from “the world” and from liberal denominations,
thus forming their own subculture. Still, because most fundamentalists
tended to form para-church institutions rather than denominations, one
could identify as a fundamentalist and contribute to fundamentalist
organizations even while remaining in mainline denominations.
Fundamentalists’ withdrawal was driven far more by their theology of
separation from the world than by any marginalization at the Scopes
trial.[^4]

[^4]:Joel A. Carpenter, *Revive Us Again: The Reawakening of
American Fundamentalism* (New York: Oxford University Press, 1997),
13-32, 57-75, 124-40. For a study of fundamentalists’ appropriation of
modern mass culture, see Douglas Carl Abrams, *Selling the Old-Time
Religion: American Fundamentalists and Mass Culture, 1920-1940* (Athens:
University of Georgia Press, 2001).

Even in the period that Carpenter studies, fundamentalists refused to
give up their claim to cultural dominance and instead planned for a
revival. What was surprising about 1970s fundamentalism, then, was not
its strength or its claims to cultural primacy, but the decision of
leaders like Falwell to give up withdrawal in favor of political
activism. Even political activism, though, was a part of
fundamentalists’ heritage. They were heirs to the evangelical reform
movements in the nineteenth century, such as temperance, abolition, and
benevolence. Fundamentalism was also a way to be modern while critiquing
the reformers of the Progressive era. Anti-evolution crusades were, for
example, an attempt to defend the doctrine of creation, but they were
also critiques of efforts to reform society scientifically, such as
eugenics.[^5]

[^5]:Carpenter, *Revive Us Again*, 32, 54, 110-23, 187-232.

Legal historian Edward J. Larson took up the study of fundamentalism and
anti-evolution in his Pulitzer prize–winning book *Summer for the Gods*.
The book is a history of the Scopes trial in Dayton, Tennessee, in 1925,
covering both the trial and its aftermath. Larson pointed out that
Dayton was not particularly fundamentalist, but that boosters drummed up
the trial as a publicity stunt to put their town on the map. The trial
might not have turned into a religious showdown until Clarence Darrow, a
famous trial attorney who was a public agnostic, and William Jennings
Bryan, a politician and leader of the anti-evolution movement, took the
case as lead counsel for the defense and the prosecution, respectively.
Darrow and Bryan, along with reporters like H. L. Mencken, turned the
trial into a *cause célèbre*that tested the validity of fundamentalist
Christianity, climaxing in Darrow’s questioning of Bryan on the witness
stand as an expert on the Bible.[^6]

[^6]:Edward J. Larson, *Summer for the
Gods: The Scopes Trial and America’s Continuing Debate Over Science and
Religion* (New York: Basic Books, 1997), 92-93, 101-5, 116-21, 198.

Larson proves that the Scopes trial was not the defeat for
fundamentalists that historians have portrayed it as. Indeed,
fundamentalists won the trial and took it as encouragement in their
crusade. On appeal, the Tennessee Supreme Court used a technicality to
avoid fining John Scopes but also to avoid striking down the
anti-evolution law, which remained on the books for decades. The
rewriting of the history of the Scopes trial into a victory for
modernism did not occur for decades, most notably in the writings of
Charles Beard and in the Broadway play and film *Inherit the Wind*,
produced in the 1950s as a fictionalized critique of McCarthyism.[^7]


[^7]: Larson, *Summer for the Gods*, 225-66.

Larson’s book makes it possible to write a history of fundamentalism
that could escape the undue influence of the Scopes trial. For too long,
historians have relied on the trial as a milestone marking the
periodization of religious history. Because it was extraordinary, the
trial is a useful lens for studying American religion, but because it is
extraordinary, the trial cannot be taken as typifying the course of
fundamentalism. What is needed is a history of fundamentalism that takes
the trial into account, yet which refuses to periodize the history of
fundamentalism around the mistaken notion that it was a turning point.
By doing so, historians can move beyond the narratives of declension and
revival into which religious history too often falls.[^8]

[^8]: An example of a
work which purports to displace the Scopes trial as “antievolution’s
defining moment” is Michael Lienesch, *In the Beginning: Fundamentalism,
the Scopes Trial, and the Making of the Antievolution Movement* (Chapel
Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2007), which nevertheless
spends only two chapters tracing the history of anti-evolution movements
after Scopes.

Marsden and Carpenter’s cultural histories provide one way of situating
fundamentalism, whether in decline or revival, within American culture.
In *A Transforming Faith*, David Harrington Watt provides a
complementary approach. Where Marsden and Carpenter explicate
fundamentalists’ distinctive subculture, Watt examines how American
culture shapes and controls the culture of fundamentalism. His approach
depends on the same definition of fundamentalism as modern, yet it
recasts the inquiry in a profitable new way.[^9]

[^9]: David Harrington Watt, *A
Transforming Faith: Explorations of Twentieth-Century American
Evangelicalism* (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1991).
Most histories of fundamentalism, like those of Marsden and Carpenter,
have tried to explicate fundamentalism’s subculture. Another fine work
in this mode is Randall Herbert Balmer, *Mine Eyes Have Seen the Glory:
A Journey into the Evangelical Subculture in America* (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1989). A recent book that, like Watt, is more
concerned to show how American culture has influenced religious
subcultures is Matthew Avery Sutton, *Aimee Semple McPherson and the
Resurrection of Christian America* (Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University
Press, 2007).

Watt examines how a subculture can maintain its identity within a
dominant culture, a hegemonic relationship he terms “asymmetrical
power.” Watt argues that American fundamentalists since the 1950s, for
all their withdrawal from and critiques of American culture, bought into
the major characteristics of the dominant culture. Watt begins with an
essay on Bill Bright’s evangelistic tract "Have You Heard of the Four
Spiritual Laws?" pointing out how the text markets Christianity as a
commodity. He extends similar analysis to other parts of evangelism.
Evangelical teaching on marriage and the family were often indebted to
feminism, while evangelical counseling owed as much to psychology as to
the Bible. Evangelical politics bought uncritically into conservative,
free market ideas. Watt’s title points to evangelicalism not as a faith
that transforms culture, but as a faith that was transforming under
culture’s influence.[^10]

[^10]: Watt, *A Transforming Faith*, 4-7, 15-32,
49-154.))

Marsden’s, Carpenter’s, and Watts’s books are cultural histories that
attempt to examine fundamentalism as a whole, to come to grips with its
essential characteristics while remaining within the particulars of
history. A local history that points in a promising direction for new
research is Margaret Bendroth’s *Fundamentalists in the City*.
Bendroth’s book is a fine-grained study of fundamentalist congregations,
leaders, and events in Boston from the 1880s to the 1950s. Her chapters
on Tremont Temple and Park Street Church in particular make good use of
demographic data and show a fine sensitivity to the local motivations
and methods peculiar to each congregation. Defining fundamentalism as
“oppositional” evangelicalism, Bendroth finds that fundamentalists in
Boston did not fight primarily against theological liberals, many of
whom called Boston and Cambridge home, but rather against Catholics.
Fundamentalists’ battles were inextricably linked to local politics,
which in Boston were defined by a statehouse controlled by Protestants
and a city hall controlled by Catholics. This kind of insight which
could not be deduced from a national history is precisely the promise of
local histories of fundamentalism. Bendroth’s study also does valuable
work in confirming the conclusions of broader studies, for example, by
illustrating how Gordon College was a crucial nexus for Boston
fundamentalists, and by showing how fundamentalism flourished even in
Boston in the periods when it was supposed to have been in decline.[^11]

[^11]: Margaret Lamberts Bendroth, *Fundamentalists in the City: Conflict and
Division in Boston’s Churches, 1885-1950* (New York: Oxford University
Press, 2005), 3-9, 99, 101-24, 155-76.

Bendroth’s history might well be taken as a model by future historians
of fundamentalism, who must fill up the deficit of local histories of
fundamentalism. To be sure, there have been many highly particular books
on recent fundamentalism. Some of these are exposes, whether as
journalism or as memoir. Of more scholarly use are David Watt’s brief
ethnographic studies of three Philadelphia congregations in the 1990s,
and James M. Ault’s sociological study of a Baptist congregation in
1980s Worcester, Massachusetts. These studies are all recent, though,
and they are not histories. What is needed are local studies of
fundamentalist congregations or institutions, researched in the
tradition of ethnographic history and focusing on the congregants rather
than the leaders. If the sources are extant, numerous congregations
present themselves as options: J. Frank Norris’s First Baptist Church in
Fort Worth; William Bell Riley’s First Baptist Church in Minneapolis,
John R. Rice’s *Sword of the Lord* conferences; A. C. Dixon’s Moody
Church in Chicago or Metropolitan Tabernacle in London; and D. Martyn
Lloyd-Jones’s Westminster Chapel in London.[^12]

[^12]: For expose as journalism,
see Kevin Roose, *The Unlikely Disciple: A Sinner’s Semester at
America’s Holiest University* (New York: Grand Central Publishing,
2009). For expose as memoir, see Frank Schaeffer, *Crazy for God: How I
Grew up as One of the Elect, Helped Found the Religious Right, and Lived
to Take All (or Almost All) of It Back* (New York: Carroll & Graf,
2007). Schaeffer’s book is notable only for being the most shameless of
the ex-fundamentalist memoirs. For a far more sensitive and sympathetic
memoir, used as a means of introduction to the history of
fundamentalism, see Brett Grainger, *In the World But Not of It: One
Family’s Militant Faith and the History of Fundamentalism in America*
(New York: Walker, 2008). David Harrington Watt, *Bible-Carrying
Christians: Conservative Protestants and Social Power* (New York: Oxford
University Press, 2002); James M. Ault, *Spirit and Flesh: Life in a
Fundamentalist Baptist Church* (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2004).

If the history of fundamentalism could benefit from going local, it
could also benefit from going transatlantic. Some of the British
connection of fundamentalism are well known, such as the tours in
Britain by evangelists from D. L. Moody to Billy Graham. Other known
connections include how American fundamentalism imported
dispensationalism and the literal interpretation of biblical prophecy
from John Nelson Darby and the Plymouth Brethren, and later imported
apologetics and fiction from C. S. Lewis. Some pastors, such as A. C.
Dixon, held pulpits in both Britain and United States. Less well known,
though, is how British and American Christians interacted on a regular
basis, and how fundamentalism in America and conservative evangelicalism
in Britain functioned in their different political and cultural
circumstances. Some excellent work has been done in tracing
evangelicalism in the Anglophone world, most notably the series *A*
*History of Evangelicalism*, edited by Mark Noll and David Bebbington. A
transatlantic study along those lines could free the study of American
fundamentalists from what may be invalid assumptions about its peculiar
Americanness. Such a transatlantic history would be a return to Ernest
Sandeen’s insight that dispensationalist theology could be understood
only by linking British and American history.[^13]

[^13]: Three volumes of *A History of Evangelicalism*, published by Inter-Varsity Press, have appeared. The two projected volumes, *The Disruption of
Evangelicalism: The Age of John R. Mott, J. Gresham Machen and Aimee
Semple McPherson*, to be written by Geoff Treloar, and *The Gobal
Diffusion of Evangelicalism: The Age of Billy Graham and John Stott*,
to be written by Brian Stanley, will cover the period of American
fundamentalism.

Historians of fundamentalism have made many advances since the 1980s.
They have dispelled mistaken interpretations of fundamentalism and
contributed a great deal of knowledge about the movement’s culture.
These gains might be consolidated in a history told finally without
dependence on the Scopes trial. And they might be advanced by pursuing
further studies fundamentalism in both its local and its transatlantic
contexts.
