---
layout: post
comments: true
title: "What's So Wrong with Myths?"
categories:
- blog
---


In this week’s issue of *The Economist*, the Lexington columnist wrote an article titled “[The Perils of Constitution-Worship](http://www.economist.com/node/17103701?story_id=17103701),” with the summary, “One of the guiding principles of the tea-party movement is based on a myth.” After I [recommended](http://twitter.com/lincolnmullen/status/25586554095) the article, a colleague at Brandeis [asked](http://twitter.com/wedaman/status/25590462791), what’s so wrong with myths anyway? This is a question well-worth asking, and answering.

<!--more-->

Myths are probably inescapable. We all believe myths, in the sense that
we all use stories about the past that are more believed than proved as
a means of explaining and arguing about the present. Society could
scarcely function if there were not some myths held in common.

Though myths may be inescapable, it does not follow that all myths are
equally true, nor that they are all equally useful. Some myths more
closely align with what can be known about the past and present than
others. To that extent, the more truthful a myth is, the more useful it
is. For myths are useful because they make prominent certain features of
the past, but in so doing they blur other features. In short, myths are
vices that must confronted, not virtues to be lauded. The task of the
historian is to reshape myths to conform as near as possible to the
truth—to be a translator speaking for the past.

To take the case of the Tea Party, since that is the particular issue at
hand, it seems clear to me that the myths the Tea Party tells are
particularly pernicious, because they are particularly (and
demonstrably) false. One might spend a great deal of time expositing
exactly why they are false in the light of several generations of
historical research, but I think
[the](http://www.economist.com/node/17103701?story_id=17103701)*[Economist](http://www.economist.com/node/17103701?story_id=17103701)*article,
among others, does a good job of explaining this succinctly.

But there is another problem with myths, beyond their deviance from
truth. The problem is that the past can never speak entirely for the
present. The past can, and should, be made to speak to the issues of the
present. But each generation must confront new situations. As [Leonard
Levy](http://books.google.com/books?id=VQnYAAAAMAAJ&q=leonard+levy+original+intent&dq=leonard+levy+original+intent&ei=AJGfTMLWEZS2ywSMqJiDCA&cd=1)
(formerly a professor at [Brandeis
University](http://www.brandeis.edu/)) observed, the framers of the
Constitution spoke plainly to the issues they anticipated, but were
silent on issues that they could not, including the most troubling
issues of today. Or, as a [statesmen but not a Founding Father
pronounced](http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/index.php?pid=29503) in a
time far worse than our own:

> The dogmas of the quiet past are inadequate to the stormy present. The
> occasion is piled high with difficulty, and we must rise with the
> occasion. As our case is new, so we must think anew and act anew. We
> must disenthrall ourselves, and then we shall save our country.
