---
layout: post
title: "From Grading to Helping Students"
date: 2012-12-11 09:58
comments: true
categories: 
- ProfHacker
- teaching
---

*[This post originally appeared at [ProfHacker][] on December 11,
2012.]*

<!--more-->

{% img right http://chronicle.com/blogs/profhacker/files/2012/12/pile-of-papers-240x300.jpg %}

For all the pleasures of teaching, grading is not
one of them. We have a bunch of ProfHacker posts [about][] [this][], and
also a [number][] of [ways][] to make your [grading process][]
[better][] or help you change the way you think about [grading][]. I
want to propose one more idea.

If it takes me on average 30--45 minutes to grade a research paper,Â only
a small amount of that time is spent evaluating the student's work in
the sense of assigning a grade. I know the final grade of the paper with
a high degree of certainty in about 5 minutes. It helps that I've read
first drafts and discussed them in conferences with the students, and it
helps that I've adopted [Brian's idea][ways] of giving only As, Bs, Cs,
etc. (or in my case, As, high Bs, low Bs, Cs, etc.). But I suspect that
most other teachers can give a ballpark grade very soon after starting
to read a paper.

The implication is that for the remaining 25 to 40 minutes spent on a
paper I am doing something other than assigning a grade. The physical
action is marking up the paper. But the mental action is more important.
If I think of that time as justifying or defending the assigned grade to
the student, I'm invariably frustrated. But if I think of that time as
helping students to learn by making comments about how they can improve,
then I feel like I'm doing useful work.

The change in thinking is this: the bulk of the grading session is moved
from a category I dislike (exercising power over students) to a category
I find rewarding (helping students to learn).

Thinking this way helps me be realistic about what kind of comments will
be most useful to students. Instead of structuring my comments as a
"praise sandwich" (which has been recommended to me) where opening
flattery and concluding flattery bracket a justification of why students
aren't getting the As they surely believe that they deserve, I structure
my comments as things the student is doing well already and things the
students could do better. I also try to focus my comments on a few areas
to work on (say, revising sentences that begin with "this" or entering
the worldview of historical actors with more sympathy) rather than
marking up everything about the paper that is wrong. Since students are
far more likely to take action on the comments on a first draft than on
a final draft, this approach also helps me grade final drafts with more
dispatch since I've spent extra time on the first drafts.

*Image courtesy of Flickr user [Sam Hames][] / Creative Commons
licensed*

  
  [about]: http://chronicle.com/blogs/profhacker/are-you-locked-in-grading-jail/27718
  [this]: http://chronicle.com/blogs/profhacker/the-salt-mines-really/22927
  [number]: http://chronicle.com/blogs/profhacker/paperless-grading-with-grademark/22898
  [ways]: http://chronicle.com/blogs/profhacker/grading-differently-2/42614
  [grading process]: http://chronicle.com/blogs/profhacker/your-grading-process/29739
  [better]: http://chronicle.com/blogs/profhacker/grading-triage/22855
  [grading]: http://chronicle.com/blogs/profhacker/from-the-archives-on-grading/27787
  [Sam Hames]: http://www.flickr.com/photos/samhames/5250383314/sizes/z/in/photostream/
  [ProfHacker]: http://chronicle.com/blogs/profhacker/from-grading-to-helping-students-a-mind-hack/44857
