---
layout: post
title: "Teaching as a Moral Relationship"
date: 2012-08-10 22:29
comments: true
categories: 
- blog
- teaching
- essays
---

*[I have been asked to participate in an orientation for new teaching
fellows at Brandeis University. As part of the panel, I am supposed to
speak for five minutes on the topic, "one piece of advice that you wish
you had known before you started teaching." These are the remarks I
intend to give, which are similar to a [post I wrote for ProfHacker][]
on a related theme. I will be glad for any critiques.]*

Good morning. My name is Lincoln Mullen, and I am a graduate student in
the history department. I have been a teaching fellow for five Brandeis
history courses, two with David Hackett Fischer and one each with Govind
Sreenivasan, David Engerman, and Xing Hang.

I have been asked to give you one piece of advice that I wish I had
known before I started teaching, and so I offer you a principle which I
learned from the professors I worked with, sometimes by word, sometimes
by example.

To state it briefly: *You should regard your teaching and all other
interactions with students as a moral relationship governed by moral
principles.*

<!--more-->

As new teachers you likely have a dozen questions about how to grade
papers, when to hand them back, what to wear, and other details of
teaching, all of which we will address in a few minutes. But for now,
step back from the minutia, and consider your role as a whole. Let me
explain what I mean by saying teaching should be a moral relationship
governed by moral principles.

We could show that teaching is primarily a *relationship* from research
into pedagogy, much of which argues that learning depends on whether
students and teachers cultivate a relationship. But instead we can prove
this empirically, because you will feel and act like you are in a
relationship. Over the sixteen weeks of the semester, you will get to
know your students, and they you. Some of them you will come to admire
and respect; for others ... it will be otherwise. But good or bad, you
will have a relationship with all your students.

So why do I say that your relationship is *moral*? We could say that you
have a professional relationship with your students. Though that is
true, it is insufficient, because professional ethics are only
supplemental to moral codes. The professional ethics which are peculiar
(in both sense of the term) to the academy govern the cases which are
unique to the academy, for example, plagiarism. But there is a danger
that you will think that if you have fulfilled the letter of your
professional obligations, you have fulfilled the spirit of your moral
obligations. In other words, it is not helpful to think of your
relationship as just professional, because those obligations are spelled
out for you. What you need to think about is how your relationship to
your students is full of the same moral complexities as any human
relationship.

There is no reason to shy away from calling the teaching relationship
moral in the context of the secular academy, since Brandeis is as much a
liberal arts college as it is a research university, and part of the
tradition of the liberal arts and their colleges is the inculcation of
virtue.

If the teacher-student relationship is first of all moral, it follows
that you should apply your moral principles to the relationship. For me,
the moral principle is "you shall shall love your neighbor as yourself."
I hold to that ethic because it was taught by Jesus in the Gospels, but
you might hold it because it is found in the Torah, or in Confucius, or
you might hold to some other principle entirely. My point is not which
moral principles you should choose, but that you should practice your
moral principles in the teaching.

What does it look like in practice to love your students as yourself?
Let's see how that ethic gives helps us answer some questions about the
details of teaching.

-   How should I interact with students? You must learn their names, and
    use them. Permit them to get to know you; get to know them as much
    as they permit.

-   How should I comment on student papers? Your comments should always
    be charitable in wording and intent, and should engage seriously
    with the argument the student intended to make.

-   How should I dress? Whatever you wear should convey seriousness
    about the subject and respect for the students. For me that is
    almost always a jacket and tie, but I'm stodgy. You can find a
    different way to convey the same meaning.

-   How available to the students should I be? You will have to pick
    office hours and set expectations for communication that fit your
    needs, but whatever you do, your students should feel that you are
    available, not unavailable.

-   Which students need my help? You can only help the students who want
    to be helped, and you'll spend most of your time helping the
    students who ask to be helped. But you have an obligation to all of
    your students, and should go out of your way to try to help all of
    them.

-   What should I do in dubious situations? You'll encounter situations
    when you doubt that a student is being honest. But always assume and
    hope that your student has the best motives and intent, because
    "love ... does not envy. ... Love hopes all things, endures all
    things."

-   How much time should I spend on being a TF? Do not shortchange your
    own work, but be willing to give---not spend---more time to your
    students than you expect, because you are putting their needs before
    your own.

As a teaching fellow I did not always---or even often---succeed at
cultivating teaching relationships as moral relationships. After one
transgression, a professor encouraged me to rethink my interactions with
students in exactly these moral terms. The most important thing you can
do as a teacher is subject all your interactions to moral discipline.

  [post I wrote for ProfHacker]: http://chronicle.com/blogs/profhacker/how-to-persuade-with-ethos-pathos-or-logos/35431
