---
layout: post
title: "What Augustine Really Said about Rape"
date: 2012-08-24 15:09
comments: true
categories: 
- blog
- essays
---

*[Note: This post was written in response to the article ["'Let It Be Unto Me': Akin, Rape, and the Early Church"][article] published in *Religion Dispatches* on August 22, 2012. It was originally posted as a comment on that article.]*

In this [article][] Professor Burrus and the other authors argue in part
that Rep. Todd Akin's remarks about 'legitimate rape' have a precedent
in the thought of Augustine of Hippo, which further discredits Akin (if
someone whose arguments about rape are so reprehensible could have any
less legitimacy). The question is whether what Augustine 'does is
essentially to blame the victim nonetheless, much as Akin seems to do.'
Regrettably, Professor Burrus seriously misrepresents Augustine's
argument in [*City of God*][].

<!--more-->

In order to understand what Augustine says about rape in [*City of God*][] it is necessary to be clear about what problems he is
addressing. Augustine does not question whether the bodies of women who
have been raped have been violated. It is plain that they have been
violated, and that it is a great tragedy. Instead, Augustine wishes to
comfort the women in the church by assuring them that they bear no
guilt. As he says, he does not intend 'to reply to accusers' as much 'as
to comfort our friends'. For this reason, Augustine primarily discusses
'sanctity' of the body and will.

Second, the bishop of Hippo had a pastoral problem on his hands, since
some pagans were arguing that rape victims should commit suicide, and
perhaps some had. Augustine condemns suicide in the strongest terms---in
order to prevent his people from taking suicide an option. But
concerning women who were raped and committed suicide he writes, 'Even
if some of these virgins killed themselves to avoid such disgrace, who
that has any human feeling would refuse to forgive them?' ([1.17][], cf.
[1.20][]).

Augustine argues that sanctity depends on the will ([1.16][]). Thus 'not
even when the body is violated is it [sanctity] lost' ([1.18][]).
Augustine takes the argument even further and argues that even the body
remains holy if the will remains holy: 'so long as the soul keeps this
firmness of purpose which sanctifies even the body, the violence done by
another's lust makes no impression on this bodily sanctity, which is
preserved intact by one's own persistent continence' ([1.18][]). I
should note that Augustine is here discussing 'sanctity' of body, not
bodily integrity. He is entirely consistent in saying that rape is a sin
against a woman's body; he denies that the rapist's sin can touch the
holiness of the victim's body or mind. Augustine takes it as a given
that the woman does not consent to her rape, but he is arguing against
those who do not take that as a given.

So why then does Augustine bring up Lucretia? Lucretia is an example of
a classical Roman woman who both was raped and committed suicide, and
thus she is a *locus classicus* for both Christians and pagans.
Professor Burrus writes that Augustine 'suggests (while acknowledging
that only Lucretia herself could have known this) that Lucretia must
have been “so enticed by her own desire that she consented to the act'.
But Professor Burrus has inexplicably left off the question mark from
Augustine's rhetorical question. What Augustine really says is this:
'What shall we call her? An adulteress, or chaste? There is no question
which she was. Not more happily than truly did a declaimer say of this
sad occurrence: “Here was a marvel: there were two, and only one
committed adultery.” Most forcibly and truly spoken' ([1.19][]). Indeed,
Augustine is unequivocal in his claim that Lucretia bore no blame
whatsoever for the rape.

But Augustine still has to deal with the question of suicide. So
Augustine finds fault with Lucretia for committing suicide, not for
being raped. In the passage that Professor Burrus discusses, Augustine
is a *rhetor* arguing through every hypothetical situation. If Lucretia
did not consent to the rape, Augustine says, then she should not have
committed suicide and killed an innocent person. Even if (for the sake
of argument) Lucretia did consent to the rape, to kill a person guilty
of adultery is not justified. The language of chapter 19 makes it
obvious that Augustine is discussing *suicide*, not rape. But to make it
even more obvious, Augustine continues for the next eight chapters on
the topic of suicide before he returns to the topic of rape
([1.20--27][1.20]).

Augustine elaborates on Lucretia's motivations. He makes it plain that
Lucretia did not commit suicide because she was secretly guilty of
consenting to her rape but because of 'the overwhelming burden of her
shame' ([1.19][]). The pagans argued that Christian women who were raped
should also feel ashamed and commit suicide. But Augustine praises
Christian women for not feeling ashamed: 'Not such was the decision of
the Christian women who suffered as she did, and yet survive. They
declined to avenge upon themselves the guilt of others, and so add
crimes of their own to those crimes in which they had no share. ...
Within their own souls, in the witness of their own conscience, they
enjoy the glory of chastity. In the sign of God, too, they are esteemed
pure ... . [T]hey decline to evade the distress of human suspicion, lest
they thereby deviate from the divine law' ([1.19][]).

Augustine is far from 'blaming the victim'; rather, he is arguing
*against* those who blame rape victims. Augustine is trying to save
women from the double tragedy of suicide induced by a false sense of
shame pressed upon the victim by society. Then as now, society does
indeed pin the blame on the victim, and women are made to feel ashamed
because of a crime that was none of their making. But Augustine provides
the classic Christian explanation of why rape victims should be clear in
their conscience and in the judgment of the church, no matter how
wrongfully society accuses them.

There is another point on which Augustine's discussion of rape is
relevant. Todd Akin is justifiably condemned for his bizarre
physiological idea that victims of 'legitimate rape' will not conceive a
child. Augustine too briefly mentions the physiology of rape. Apparently
some extremists were making the argument that Christians should commit
suicide if there was the possibility that they would be raped, lest in
the act of rape their wills would be seduced by pleasure and consent to
the rape. This was an absurd argument (though regrettably it has echoes
in much of our contemporary discourse about rape), and Augustine treats
it as absurd. Even supposing that someone could take pleasure in rape,
'its motions in the body of one who rebels against them are as blameless
as its motions in the body of one who sleeps.' ([1.25][]) Augustine's
point is not that rape is pleasurable: no one who reads his sobering
descriptions of the sack of Rome would think that. His point is that
even if a woman's body reacts to rape (as in conception), the victim is
entirely guiltless.

Of course Augustine was no twenty-first century progressive, and he
cannot be made to speak like one. But in his views on women and rape,
Augustine was a fifth century progressive, defending on the basis of
Christian teaching the blamelessness of women who were raped against the
accusations of pagans based on the Roman story of Lucretia. It would be
harder to find a clearer condemnation of Akin's bizarre and dangerous
ideas across sixteen centuries than Augustine's.

As Augustine writes, 'This ... is our position, and it seems
sufficiently lucid' ([1.19][]). Readers can find the [relevant pages of Augustine online][] and judge for themselves.

I write this exposition of the [*City of God*][relevant pages of Augustine online] at such length not to justify Augustine, but rather to
condemn Todd Akin. Doubtless the authors of this article wish to oppose
Akin by linking him to what they suppose Augustine to have said. But
connecting Akin's ideas, which are beyond the pale, to one of the great
writers of the Christian church is a bizarre and ineffective way to do
so.

For Augustine is the kind of writer whom conservative Presbyterians like
Akin and his supporters respect, as do most churches coming out of the
Reformation. (It can hardly be news to the authors that Akin is unlikely
to be a regular reader of a progressive publication like [*Religion Dispatches*][].) For that matter, Augustine is a writer whom the
Catholic Church---whose hierarchy have covered up many, many
rapes---honors as a doctor of a church.

It is vitally important, then, that we get Augustine right. Getting
Augustine wrong denies Christian rape victims the comfort that the
church has since its earliest days condemned the rapist and not the
victim. And what Augustine really says about rape opposes Todd Akin and
others who blame the victims point by point. These arguments from
Augustine are arguments that might actually persuade. Perhaps a better
title for the article would not have been to quote Mary, but to quote
Jesus' parable (Luke 19:22): 'I will judge you with your own words, you
wicked servant!'

  [article]: http://www.religiondispatches.org/archive/atheologies/6316/%E2%80%98let_it_be_unto_me%E2%80%99%3A_akin%2C_rape%2C_and_the_early_church/
  [1.17]: http://www.ccel.org/ccel/schaff/npnf102.iv.ii.xviii.html
  [1.20]: http://www.ccel.org/ccel/schaff/npnf102.iv.ii.xxi.html
  [1.16]: http://www.ccel.org/ccel/schaff/npnf102.iv.ii.xvii.html
  [1.18]: http://www.ccel.org/ccel/schaff/npnf102.iv.ii.xix.html
  [1.19]: http://www.ccel.org/ccel/schaff/npnf102.iv.ii.xx.html
  [1.25]: http://www.ccel.org/ccel/schaff/npnf102.iv.ii.xxvi.html
  [relevant pages of Augustine online]: http://www.ccel.org/ccel/schaff/npnf102.toc.html
  [*Religion Dispatches*]: http://www.religiondispatches.org/
  [*City of God*]: http://www.ccel.org/ccel/schaff/npnf102.toc.html
