---
layout: post
title: "Aggregating Positions on Maps by Manipulating the Data"
date: 2013-12-11 16:21
categories:
- DH
- R-language
- mapping
---

I've recently been [mapping the missions of the Paulist Fathers][] over
the course of the nineteenth century. One problem with the data is that
many of the points overlap with one another, since the Paulists were
often in cities like New York, Philadelphia, Chicago, and Baltimore.
When mapping these points, they overlap with one another.

This is a common problem in mapping, which [Leaflet.js][] solves
admirably for web maps. See, for example, the [DPLA's map of items][].
Another solution is to make the points transparent, so that overlapping
points are darker than one another. While a judicious use of
transparency can help in some places, it is generally a poor solution.
It's hard to explain what the layered colors mean to users, and the eye
is poor at detecting the difference anyway.

What I wanted to do is to sum together the overlapping points. So for
example, instead of having a data file with a mission at St. Peter's
Church in New York in September 1851 with 4,000 confessions, and another
mission at St. Patrick's Cathedral in October 1851 with 7,000
confessions, I wanted a data file where those points are aggregated as
New York missions in 1851 with 11,000 total confessions and 2 missions.

This task is a simple job for Hadley Wickham's [plyr][] package in R.

{% highlight r %}
library(plyr)

raw <- read.csv("data/paulist-chronicles/paulist-missions.geocoded.csv")

aggregated <- ddply(raw, .(city, state, year), summarize,
                    long = max(geo.lon),
                    lat =  max(geo.lat),
                    confessions = sum(confessions_total, na.rm = TRUE),
                    converts = sum(converts_total, na.rm = TRUE),
                    number_missions = length(location)) 

write.csv(aggregated, 
          "data/paulist-chronicles/paulist-missions.aggregated.csv",
          row.names = FALSE)
{% endhighlight %}

First we load the package and read in the raw data. One function,
`ddply`, will accomplish our work for us. The first argument passes our
data to the function. The second argument, `.(city, state, year)`,
splits up our original data by finding all the unique combinations of
the `city`, `state`, and `year` variables. In other words, `ddply` makes
a new data frame for each combination, such as New York missions in
1851, New York missions in 1852, Chicago missions in 1851, Chicago
missions in 1852, and so on. (We could leave out the `year` variable if
we wanted to aggregate the missions just by place, not the combination
of time and place.) Then `ddply` applies the `summarize` function to
each of those split-up data frames. Essentially we're deciding on the
columns for our new aggregated data frame. For `long` and `lat`, we're
taking the maximum value for, say, each New York mission, but each New
York mission should have the same latitude and longitude so it doesn't
matter. For `confessions` and `converts` we are summing up the total.
Then for the `number_missions` we count the `length` of the split-up
data frame (in other words, the total number of observations that have
the unique combination of `city`, `state`, and `year`).

You can see what this does by looking at the [original data][], which
goes through [this script][] to produce this [aggregated data][]. I
won't belabor the explanation, since Wickham explains it better than I
can in his article "[The Split-Apply-Combine Strategy for Data
Analysis][]." [^1] What I do want to point out is that this is a useful 
technique for making maps with overlapping points. And even if you are 
making the maps outside of R, perhaps in GIS software or in D3, R and 
plyr can still be powerful tools to get your data into the proper 
format.

[^1]: Hadley Wickham, "The Split-Apply-Combine Strategy for Data
    Analysis," *Journal of Statistical Software* 40, no. 1 (April 2011):
    1--29, <http://www.jstatsoft.org/v40/i01>.

  [mapping the missions of the Paulist Fathers]: http://usreligion.blogspot.com/2013/10/historical-religion-data-in-nhgis-and.html
  [Leaflet.js]: http://leafletjs.com/
  [DPLA's map of items]: http://dp.la/map
  [plyr]: http://plyr.had.co.nz/
  [original data]: https://github.com/lmullen/demographics-religion/blob/master/data/paulist-chronicles/paulist-missions.geocoded.csv
  [this script]: https://github.com/lmullen/demographics-religion/blob/master/data/paulist-chronicles/aggregate-missions.r
  [aggregated data]: https://github.com/lmullen/demographics-religion/blob/master/data/paulist-chronicles/paulist-missions.aggregated.csv
  [The Split-Apply-Combine Strategy for Data Analysis]: http://www.jstatsoft.org/v40/i01
