---
categories:
- reviews
- Religion in American History
date: '2013-12-01 16:48'
layout: post
title: From the Rivers of Water to the River of Dark Dreams
---

*[This post originally appeared at [Religion in American History][].]*

As Erskine Clarke begins his most [recent book][], Paul, a slave, looks
from a rice plantation across the Savannah River to the busy docks of
the city of Savannah. Clarke describes life on the plantation and in the
city for Paul, a carpenter, as Paul worried whether he would be sold
away from the Bayard family that owned him and the other slaves on
Hamilton Island. It is not until the end of the second chapter that we
learn what has troubled Paul: the soon-to-be minister John Leighton
Wilson's arrival in Savannah in 1832 and engagement to Jane Bayard, the
woman for whom Paul was owned in trust. In a master stroke of suspense,
Clarke thus manages to introduce his readers to the intertwined lives of
several of the main people in his narrative.

Even in these opening pages, readers who have encountered Clarke's
earlier book, the Bancroft-prize-winning epic *[Dwelling Place][]*, will
note the hallmarks of Clarke's signature style. As in that earlier work,
Clarke reconstructs historical lives and places with minute attention to
the details of relationships between people. But where *Dwelling Place*
took place mostly in Liberty County, Georgia, Clarke's *[By the Rivers
of Water][recent book]* follows the Savannah River---and John Leighton
Wilson and Jane Bayard Wilson---into the Atlantic Ocean and all the way
to missions in Africa. Leighton and Jane became missionaries under the
American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions in Cape Palmas in
Liberia, then later in the Gabon Estuary. What we get in this book is a
history that follows the Wilsons, as well as freed slaves who traveled
to Liberia, from South Carolina and Georgia to West Africa and back
again to New York, Boston, and elsewhere in the United States, cutting
across the histories of slavery, colonization, missions, nullification,
abolition and opposition to the slave trade, and the Civil War.

Erskine Clarke may very well be the best writer of narrative working in
American religious history. His method is what Clarke calls "disciplined
imagination" (xiv). This discipline is above all to the primary sources.
It would be strange to praise Clarke's work for depth in the primary
works, since this is the minimum for acceptable work in the discipline
of history. Still, Clarke's method is like intensive agriculture,
turning up every bit of the soil and maximizing the yield. The other
part of the discipline is immersion in the secondary works on American
slavery and religion. Each paragraph of the work is as much indebted to
that lifetime study of the secondary work as to the deep analysis of the
primary sources. This work is, in short, a model of how to write
narrative history that is not excessively dependent on colleagues' works
but nevertheless uses them at every turn. This discipline serves his
imaginative reconstructions of places and people, and above all of
social interactions.

This mode of narrative is not without compromises in this particular
work. The narrative hovers over the Wilsons at more or less the same
height throughout the book, so we seldom get a chance to pull back and
see the entire world through which they are traveling. For example, the
book only discusses what it meant to live in a huge Atlantic world in
bits and pieces: that meaning is mostly in the aggregate of the smaller
details rather than synthetically discussed. And frankly, the book could
have been shorter. In recounting the wearying round of daily labor, and
of establishing two mission posts, the book bogs down in some of the
middle sections because of the unvarying nature of the narrative. But
perhaps those moments of tedium too are part of the narrative genius of
the work, since they convey what must have been the tedium of the
Wilsons' lives. I am willing to believe that the slowness of parts of
the book are due more to my shortcomings as a reader than to Clarke's
craft as a writer.

It is not easy to place *By the Rivers of Water* within a
historiographical niche. Because of the way that Clarke writes his
narrative, there are no historiographic discussions, nor does the book
aim to advance any one field. Rather the book cuts many categories---the
Atlantic World, slavery, missions, religion---that different readers
will find the book useful for different reasons. I came to this book for
its treatment of American missions and of African-American and African
religious experience, and was fascinated to learn details such practices
of communion within the mission and how the Wilsons (like other ABCFM
missionaries) named African converts after prominent donors or spiritual
models. I can't help but compare this book to another recent work on
American slavery, Walter Johnson's *[River of Dark Dreams: Slavery and
Empire in the Cotton Kingdom][]* ([reviewed here][], and many other
places). Both works have rivers in their titles, and the similarities
run far deeper than that coincidence. Both works rely on narrative to
reconstruct and recount the history of slavery. Both works elaborate the
inner workings of systems: the family, plantation, and mission, in the
case of Clarke; the capitalist system of slavery, in the case of
Johnson. But in another sense, are as far apart as the "rivers of water"
from the Psalms seem to be from exploitation of slaves on the muddy
waters of the Mississippi. If I can sum up the difference in a word for
each, Clarke's book is personal, and Johnson's book is abstract. That is
to say, everything in Clarke's book is tied to some person, and told
from his or her perspective; everything in Johnson's book explains how
capitalism turned realities like land, crops, and people into the
abstractions of the capitalist marketplace. Historians of religion more
naturally gravitate to Clarke than to Johnson, and we all have something
to learn from Clarke's craft. But most histories of religion that deal
with the history of capitalism cover the twentieth century. It remains
for religious historians of the nineteenth century to account more fully
for the pervasive influence of American capitalism.

  [Religion in American History]: http://usreligion.blogspot.com/2013/12/from-rivers-of-water-to-river-of-dark.html
  [recent book]: https://www.amazon.com/dp/0465002722/ref=as_li_ss_til?tag=thebacgla-20&camp=0&creative=0&linkCode=as4&creativeASIN=0465002722&adid=1Q8CTK31XEYMHJTSCGWZ&
  [Dwelling Place]: https://www.amazon.com/dp/030012256X/ref=as_li_ss_til?tag=thebacgla-20&camp=0&creative=0&linkCode=as4&creativeASIN=030012256X&adid=1KA9NXH5H0M262ZCE5W4&
  [River of Dark Dreams: Slavery and Empire in the Cotton Kingdom]: https://www.amazon.com/dp/0674045556/ref=as_li_ss_til?tag=thebacgla-20&camp=0&creative=0&linkCode=as4&creativeASIN=0674045556&adid=1G01AVDVJZSPQZG3SND2&
  [reviewed here]: http://nplusonemag.com/slave-capitalism
