---
layout: post
title: "Maps of Catholic Dioceses in the US, Canada, and Mexico"
date: 2013-06-16 22:48
categories: 
- demographics-of-religion
- R-language
- history
---

**Update:** I've made better maps of these dioceses in [this post][].

It's well known among American religious historians that the first
Catholic diocese in the United States was the diocese of Baltimore,
erected in 1789 under Bishop John Carroll. What I didn't know was how
Catholic dioceses spread across the United States, and how U.S. dioceses
related to Canadian and Mexican dioceses. So I gathered data on Catholic
dioceses in the [United States][], [Canada][], and [Mexico][], and
[mapped][] their spread across North America over time. Below are maps
of 356 North American dioceses by decade, with brief comments on the
nineteenth-century maps about what they reveal about U.S. Catholicism.

A few general comments: A map of Catholic dioceses is not, of course, a
map of Catholics. The institution lags behind people. Nevertheless, I
think that plotting dioceses is useful for understanding the
institutional structure of the North American Catholic Church. In
particular, as I'll show in my comments below, combining Canadian and
Mexican dioceses with U.S. dioceses provides a much fuller picture of
North American Catholicism over several centuries.

In these maps, dioceses that are not within the bounds of the map have
not been plotted, in particular some dioceses in Alaska, Puerto Rico,
the Virgin Islands, Newfoundland and Labrador, New Brunswick, Nova
Scotia, Prince Edward Island, and the very north of Canada. Red dots are
dioceses; purple dots are archdioceses. I have included both Latin and
non-Latin rite dioceses in the charts: you can look in the [data][] to
find the locations of non-Latin rite jurisdictions. I have included only
dioceses, but not regions or institutions with ordinary jurisdiction but
not episcopal character.

#### 1790

The map for 1790 shows the first U.S. diocese in Baltimore. But the map
also shows the Catholic diocese in Quebec: the source of so much
consternation to Protestants during the American Revolution. It also
shows ten dioceses, including a metropolitan see, in Mexico, some of
which had been established since the sixteenth century. There were also
dioceses in the Caribbean not shown. The territory that became the
United States was very late to establish this institution of the
Catholic church.

{% img center /downloads/demographics/map.catholic.dioceses.1790.png %}

#### 1800

By 1800 a diocese has been added in New Orleans, but it was under the
jurisdiction of the French and not the United States, though it would
become part of the United States through the Louisiana Purchase.

{% img center /downloads/demographics/map.catholic.dioceses.1800.png %}

#### 1810

In April of 1808, Baltimore was elevated to be an archdiocese, with
three new sees: Boston, New York, and Bardstown, Kentucky. While
Baltimore in the mid-Atlantic state of Maryland remained the
institutional center, and while Boston and New York were gaining new
prominence, the western frontier was also important for of U.S.
Catholicism.

{% img center /downloads/demographics/map.catholic.dioceses.1810.png %}

#### 1820

{% img center /downloads/demographics/map.catholic.dioceses.1820.png %}

#### 1830

By 1830 the U.S. dioceses continue to expand in the west and along the
Atlantic seaboard. But a Canadian diocese in Kingston (before a diocese
in Montreal) shows the importance of the Great Lakes and St. Lawrence
River.

{% img center /downloads/demographics/map.catholic.dioceses.1830.png %}

#### 1840

By 1840 there are more dioceses in the Mississippi River valley. But
there are also two Mexican dioceses in California in territory which
would become part of the United States in the next decade due to the
Mexican-American War.

{% img center /downloads/demographics/map.catholic.dioceses.1840.png %}

#### 1850

By the 1850s there were a number of new dioceses in the Great Lakes
region in both the United States and Canada. New York, but also New
Orleans, St. Louis, Cincinnati, and Portland, had been elevated to
archdioceses. There is also a cluster of dioceses in the Pacific
Northwest in the territory disputed by the U.S. and Canada.

{% img center /downloads/demographics/map.catholic.dioceses.1850.png %}

#### 1860

By the 1860s most of the growth in dioceses has been on both sides of
the Great Lakes.

{% img center /downloads/demographics/map.catholic.dioceses.1860.png %}

#### 1870

{% img center /downloads/demographics/map.catholic.dioceses.1870.png %}

#### 1880

{% img center /downloads/demographics/map.catholic.dioceses.1880.png %}

#### 1890

{% img center /downloads/demographics/map.catholic.dioceses.1890.png %}

#### 1900-2010

{% img center /downloads/demographics/map.catholic.dioceses.1900.png %}

{% img center /downloads/demographics/map.catholic.dioceses.1910.png %}

{% img center /downloads/demographics/map.catholic.dioceses.1920.png %}

{% img center /downloads/demographics/map.catholic.dioceses.1930.png %}

{% img center /downloads/demographics/map.catholic.dioceses.1940.png %}

{% img center /downloads/demographics/map.catholic.dioceses.1950.png %}

{% img center /downloads/demographics/map.catholic.dioceses.1960.png %}

{% img center /downloads/demographics/map.catholic.dioceses.1970.png %}

{% img center /downloads/demographics/map.catholic.dioceses.1980.png %}

{% img center /downloads/demographics/map.catholic.dioceses.1990.png %}

{% img center /downloads/demographics/map.catholic.dioceses.2000.png %}

{% img center /downloads/demographics/map.catholic.dioceses.2010.png %}

  [this post]: /blog/maps-of-catholic-dioceses-in-the-us-canada-and-mexico-take-two/
  [United States]: https://github.com/lmullen/demographics-religion/blob/master/data/catholic.dioceses.us.csv
  [Canada]: https://github.com/lmullen/demographics-religion/blob/master/data/catholic.dioceses.canada.csv
  [Mexico]: https://github.com/lmullen/demographics-religion/blob/master/data/catholic.dioceses.mexico.csv
  [mapped]: https://github.com/lmullen/demographics-religion/blob/master/map.catholic.dioceses.R
  [data]: https://github.com/lmullen/demographics-religion
