title: "How to Make Prudent Choices About Your Tools"
date: 2013-08-14 12:00
comments: true
categories: 
- ProfHacker
tags: 
- ProfHacker
---

*[This post originally appeared at [ProfHacker][].]*

One of the occupational hazards of being the kind of person who writes 
for or reads ProfHacker is the constant urge to try out new tools or 
techniques in the relentless search for "productivity." Sharpening one's 
tools might be a mark of a professional, yet constantly switching tools 
is the mark of someone who is just wasting time. As Jason has 
[explained][], ProfHacker is not interested in hacks for hacks' sake.

Abraham Lincoln (almost certainly never) said, "Give me six hours to
chop down a tree, and I'll spend the first four sharpening my ax."
Whoever came up with it, that bit of folksy wisdom neatly captures an
ambiguity about work. You'd be a fool to work with a dull ax, but being
shrewd about your preparations can quickly turn into being lazy about
actually doing your work.

How can you make prudent choices about which tools to use? I'd like to
offer a few rules of thumb that I've developed for myself. I've thought
about these in terms of what software to use, but I think they work for
picking any kind of tool or settling on any kind of process. They're
listed in descending order of importance. I'm willing to stand by the
first as an iron law of productivity; the rest have a lot more wiggle
room.

**1. The best possible tool is the one you're already using to get work
done.** No, really. Are turning out a book a year using Microsoft Word
3.1 on Windows 95? Don't worry about your technology, you're doing just
fine. Here is a [story][] about John McPhee, where he describes how he
uses a text editor barely updated since the 1980s. Are you barely
getting any writing accomplished? Then your problem is definitely not
your word processor, and you don't have time to try out a new one. You
can be sure that you will badly misjudge the costs of switching tools or
work processes. After working with a tool for a while, you forget all
the familiarity you've built up, all the muscle memory, all the ways
that the tool is useful to you. Instead, all you see are the annoyances.
But on the other hand, all you see about a new tool are the shiny new
features, and you can't see all the hours and days you'll spend learning
and adapting, fiddling and breaking the new tool.

**2. Prefer the tool that your local co-workers use.** Objectively
speaking, Google Docs is probably better than Microsoft Sharepoint, and
R is probably better than SAS. It's probably a toss-up between Ruby and
Python. But if all the people you work with use Sharepoint, SAS, and
Python, then those are the tools you should be using too. Not only will
you reap the benefits of easier collaboration, you'll also gain access
to a wealth of human expertise.

**3. Prefer the tool that is used by awesome developers. **You want to
be using tools that the very best people are working, because they'll
sharpen your tools for you. For example, I use [Vim][] to edit text
because hundreds of developers have made plugins that solve almost all
of my problems with editing prose and code.  I probably wouldn't know
how to use [R][] except [Hadley Wickham][] has created  many useful
packages for it. And I use [Omeka][] for research and course projects
because the core developers and community contributors are producing an
amazingly useful tool that I can trust because the people who make it
are trained as historians and humanists.

**4. Prefer the tool used by the top people in your field. **If the top
people in your field all use one tool, that's what you should use too,
so that you can learn from how they do their work. (This doesn't really
matter for writing; it matters more for data analysis and the like.)
Most of the people I've come in contact with use Ruby, so that's the
language I've learned the best; under different circumstances, I would
have learned a different language.

**5. Prefer the current, stable version of software to the latest
release.** Particularly to people of a given mindset, the shine and
jingle of new features can be quite alluring, but if it's not broken,
don't upgrade it. Just as you overestimate the utility and underestimate
the pain of switching tools, you will also make the same miscalculation
about versions. Let naive users try out a new release and find all its
flaws. You can jump in after the bugs are fixed. There's a reason they
call it "bleeding edge technology."

**6. Prefer the tool which you can learn about and customize to your
workflow.** The difference between professional tools and amateur tools
is this. Amateur tools are easy to use from the start, and you'll be
just about as efficient with them on day one as you'll ever be. Pro
tools are hard to learn: you might completely flounder on day one. But
because there is room to learn, you can learn to be vastly more
efficient with them. That explains my love affair with Vim: it took me
weeks to learn, but now the the biggest limitation on editing text and
code is my brain rather than my tools. ([Stephen Ramsay][] makes this
point [here][] and [here][1] and [here][2].)

This set of guidelines is a rather conservative. You might justly ask,
if I follow these guidelines, when would I ever try a new tool or new
workflow? Indeed, for people like me and, possibly, people like you,
limiting our proclivities to try something new instead of get something
accomplished is precisely the point.

Still, there are a few good times to learn new approaches, tools, and
methods. One of those times is in graduate school. [Kieran Healy][] has
an excellent paper on "[Choosing Your Workflow Applications][],"
intended to teach graduate students and early career scholars in the
social sciences how to do reproducible research. He writes, "If you’re
in the early phase of your career as a graduate student ... , you should
give some thought to how you’re going to organize and manage your work."
I think he's exactly right. Probably one of the most difficult
challenges of the dissertation was figuring out how to organize my
scholarly work to handle the volume of research and length of time that
goes into a book-length as opposed to a seminar-paper-length project.
Another time that it is appropriate to experiment with new ways of
working is in between major projects.

I'm not saying you can't try new software or tools if you want to and
have fun doing so. Just don't kid yourself that you're doing work, and
don't fall into the trap of believing that it's making you more
productive.

**What is your take? How do you think about which tools you use?**

\* I vaguely remember that someone, perhaps at ProfHacker, wrote a post
on this same topic. If so, let me know who it was and I'll give that
person credit.

  [ProfHacker]: http://chronicle.com/blogs/profhacker/how-to-make-prudent-choices-about-your-tools/51261
  [explained]: http://chronicle.com/blogs/profhacker/what-we-talk-about-when-we-talk-about-productivity/47805
  [story]: http://www.newyorker.com/reporting/2013/01/14/130114fa_fact_mcphee
  [Vim]: http://www.vim.org/
  [R]: http://www.r-project.org/
  [Hadley Wickham]: http://had.co.nz/
  [Omeka]: http://omeka.org/
  [Stephen Ramsay]: http://stephenramsay.us/
  [here]: http://stephenramsay.us/2011/04/09/life-on-the-command-line/
  [1]: http://stephenramsay.us/2011/07/25/the-mythical-man-finger/
  [2]: http://stephenramsay.us/2011/08/05/the-man-finger-aftermath/
  [Kieran Healy]: http://kieranhealy.org/
  [Choosing Your Workflow Applications]: http://kieranhealy.org/files/misc/workflow-apps.pdf
