---
layout: post
title: "Break Out of Your Lack-of-Feedback Loop"
date: 2013-05-30 11:00
categories: 
- ProfHacker
---

*[This post originally appeared at [ProfHacker][].]*

Does this ever happen to you? Let's say you're writing an article or a
chapter. It's taking longer than you anticipated. (No surprise there.)
Your editor or your dissertation advisor, or maybe just your writing
group, is expecting to read a draft, but you think it's not ready. It's
incomplete, it's tentative, it doesn't adequately review the secondary
literature, it doesn't take into account a source you haven't read yet.
So you put off sending out your work. Then another opportunity comes
around to share your work. But in the intervening month, your draft
hasn't improved as much as you'd hoped, and surely your readers'
expectations have been raised. So you put off sending out your
work until you're convinced that your readers' expectations are so high
that you can't show them your draft until the draft is worthy of a
Pulitzer Prize.

This scenario probably describes the writing life of too many graduate
students and, I suspect, many other writers even after graduate school.
But it's an amateur mistake.

You show your work in progress to other people *because* it's not good
enough. It's not good enough in ways that you know about, and it's
probably not good enough in ways that you don't know about. Other
readers can help you work through those problems because they come to
your work not having seen it before. Your drafts will probably come back
covered in the proverbial red ink.

But comments and corrections, as helpful as they are, aren't the most
useful result of sharing your work. Letting other people read your draft
leads to a eureka moment: people are *interested* in your work. They
want to read it, and they might even ask to read more of it, which you
will then have to write.

I'm convinced that the hardest part about writing academic work is the
[lack of an audience][], or more precisely, the long gap between the
time you start writing and the time your readers start reading. Perhaps
some people write to please themselves, but I doubt too many monographs
are completed that way. Writers write for readers. And if every time you
sit at your desk, creeping doubt reminds you that no one will read your
work for six months or six years, if ever, it's really hard to get good
work done.

On the other hand, there is no greater encouragement for writing than
knowing that people are reading your prose. Even just a handful of
readers can drive you to write more and better prose, with more
pleasure.

Here are a few ways you can break out of your lack-of-feedback loop. You
could send your writing group the first half of a chapter, rather than
feeling obligated to send the whole thing or nothing at all. You could
write up a précis of your draft, and ask for comments on the big
picture. Or you could write up select portions of your work for public
audiences. Recently I've been posting [vignettes][] or
[methodological][] musings from the chapter I'm writing to my blog, and
I've convinced myself to share drafts with advisors and colleagues
sooner. It doesn't much matter which strategy you try, as long as you
get in the habit of sharing your work early.

  [ProfHacker]: http://chronicle.com/blogs/profhacker/break-out-of-your-lack-of-feedback-loop/49815
  [lack of an audience]: http://chronicle.com/blogs/profhacker/an-audience-of-none/36320
  [vignettes]: http://lincolnmullen.com/blog/clarence-walworths-incontrovertible-baptism/
  [methodological]: http://lincolnmullen.com/blog/first-thoughts-on-using-r-as-a-historian/
