---
layout: post
title: "Initial Thoughts from the AHA / ASCH / ACHA"
date: 2013-01-06 14:53
comments: true
categories: 
- history
tags:
- AHA
- ACHA
- ASCH
- Catholicism
- conversion
- storytelling
---

Today is the final day of the American Historical Association's annual
meeting, along with the annual meetings of the American Society for
Church History and the American Catholic Historical Association, but I
am back at my desk in Boston after spending the last three days in New
Orleans.

This year was my first year participating in the ACHA, as part of a
panel titled "A Matter of Individual Choice: The Lives of American
Catholic Converts." My co-panelists were [Erin Bartram][], [Stephanie
Jacobe][] (who organized the panel), and [Charles Gallagher][], and [Una
Cadegan][] chaired the panel. My colleagues each gave papers on
individual converts: Erin on Jane Sedgwick, Stephanie on Thomas Fortune
Ryan, and Charles on Emmanuel H. Chapman. My role on the panel was to
attempt something like a synthesis (as much as one can in seven pages),
which I did in a paper on "Catholic Converts in the Nineteenth-century
Market of Souls" ([PDF][]). I admired the depth of research that each of
my colleagues have done into the converts that they are studying. More
than any other panel I have been on, our papers worked together towards
a common goal, and in the question-and-answer time we were able to
productively talk with and question one another.

<!--more-->

The past two times I've been to these conferences, the center of my
orbit has always been the ASCH. The ASCH is extraordinarily generous
to graduate students (so many free dinners!), and its panels are usually
the most interesting. But because I was registered for the ACHA and thus
not for the ASCH, and because I went to several of the plenary sessions
at the AHA this year, this year I gravitated towards a theme I didn't
expect.

The theme was history as storytelling. I attended the first plenary
[session][] on "The Public Practice of History in and for a Digital
Age," then Bill Cronon's AHA presidential address "Storytelling" (video
[here][], [live tweeted][] by me and several others), then a [panel][] on
"Clio's Craft: History and Storytelling" chaired by Marni Sandweiss.
Since one of the subthemes of the conference was "blog more," I'll try
to think through what I learned in a few more posts later on.

One last thought for this post, though. Several people following the
conference on Twitter asked me whether the conference was as
angst-ridden as it seemed. Sure---the AHA has angst [a'plenty][]. Next
year when I'm on the job market I'll probably have enough of my own. But
angst was not---for me, at least---the defining feature of the
conference. Our profession faces deep problems, among them ... oh, let's
not list them all here. Some of these are internal to the profession or
the academy; almost all of them are connected to larger problems in
society: legislatures' divestment from education, the casualization of
labor, poor education of students in primary and secondary schools,
personal and governmental indebtedness, partisan gridlock and so on.
Despite all those problems, I have the strong sense that the leaders of
our profession are making every effort to solve them with competence and
good faith. Anthony Grafton and Jim Grossman's [proposal][] for "No More
Plan B" and Bill Cronon's emphasis on storytelling and the digital are
only the two most recent examples. One would be naive to think that the
future of the profession is bright. But I came away from the AHA with a
renewed sense that the profession was valuable and could, by playing to
its strengths, regain strength.

Unfortunately, beause of my early departure I missed David Hackett
Fischer's George C. Marshall Lecture in Military History, titled "Open
Societies at War: A Comparative History, 1939--45." The [video][] of
that lecture has been posted at the History News Network.

For much, much more on the AHA, see posts by John Fea and his
correspondents Erin Bartram and Mary Sanders at [Fea's blog][], posts at
[HNN][], and posts at the [ASCH's blog][].

  [Erin Bartram]: http://history.uconn.edu/graduate/bartram.php
  [Stephanie Jacobe]: http://american.academia.edu/StephanieJacobe
  [Charles Gallagher]: http://www.bc.edu/schools/cas/history//faculty/alphabetical/gallagher_charles.html
  [Una Cadegan]: http://www.udayton.edu/directory/artssciences/history/cadegan_una.php
  [PDF]: {{root_url}}/docs/Mullen.acha.2013.md.pdf
  [session]: http://aha.confex.com/aha/2013/webprogram/Session9319.html
  [here]: http://hnn.us/videos/149965.html
  [live tweeted]: http://thebroadside.org/tw-archives/aha2013.php
  [panel]: http://aha.confex.com/aha/2013/webprogram/Session9310.html
  [a'plenty]: http://www.beacondrivein.com/
  [proposal]: http://www.historians.org/perspectives/issues/2011/1110/1110pre1.cfm
  [video]: http://hnn.us/videos/149967.html
  [Fea's blog]: http://www.philipvickersfithian.com/search/label/AHA-New%20Orleans
  [HNN]: http://hnn.us/articles/highlights-2013-annual-meeting-american-historical-association
  [ASCH's blog]: http://www.churchhistory.org/blogs/blog/tag/winter-2013-meeting/
