---
layout: post
title: "Analyzing Historical History Dissertations: Page Counts"
date: 2014-02-10 11:00
categories: 
- r-language
- digital-humanities
- historical-dissertations
---

*This series on "Analyzing Historical History Dissertations" is a work
in progress and I've re-done some of these visualizations. If you would
like to cite or link to this work in progress, please consider using the
**[landing page][]**, which will always have the most up-to-date
information and a list of all the posts.*

  [landing page]: http://lincolnmullen.com/research/history-dissertations/

The first question anyone writing a dissertation probably asks is, How
long should this thing be? When Michael Beck looked at data from the
University of Minnesota, he found that [history dissertations were the
longest][]. Ben Schmidt found that the average length of history
dissertations at Princeton [varied quite a bit][], from a peak of about
425 pages on average around 1995 to a low of slightly more than 250
pages on average around 2006 or 2007. Ben also concluded that "300 pages
is the normal length."

Using the ProQuest data, we can see how history dissertations varied in
length over time:

{% img /downloads/historical-dissertations/pages-since-1878.png %}

The more useful view is to look at just dissertations since 1945:

{% img /downloads/historical-dissertations/pages-since-1945.png %}

We can make a few observations. First, the average length of
dissertations is remarkably stable. From 1880 to 1930, history
dissertations get quite a bit longer. But since from the 1950s to the
present, the average length of dissertations has fluctuated within a
relatively narrow band. That band is relatively narrow, that is, in
relation to the huge overall variation in the length of history
dissertations, which have a normal range between 150 and 600 pages. The
acceptable range can even go a little lower than 150 pages, and it can
go much, much higher than 600 pages.

We can be more precise about typical length of a history dissertation by
plotting the mean and median. (If you prefer, you can see that data in
tabular form at the end of the post.)

{% img /downloads/historical-dissertations/pages-mean-median.png %}

The mean length is longer by 27 pages on average than the median length,
as you would expect since the permissible maximum length for a
dissertation is much more flexible than the permissible minimum length.
But the two measures fluctuate more or less in tandem. From a peak in
1958 to a trough in 1972, dissertations got shorter by about 45 pages.
Then from 1972 dissertations gradually got longer till they reached a
peak in 1988 about 55 pages longer. Since 1988 dissertations are getting
shorter, with 2012 being a low with a mean of 331 and a median of 306.

I don't have a good explanation for these fluctuations. Could
dissertations have gotten shorter from 1958 to 1972 because of a shift
from narrative or political history to social history? Then could they
have gotten longer from 1972 to 1988 because of the rise of cultural
history? I suppose, though the dates feel vaguely off. What explains why
dissertations got shorter through the 1990s and 2000s? I think matching
this data up to time-to-degree data and job market data might prove
fruitful.

It's not enough to look at the mean or median dissertation length, given
that there is such an enormous variation in the permissible length of
dissertations. Another helpful way to look at the data is to see the
distribution of the quartiles. (This chart cuts off many outliers above
800 pages long.)

{% img /downloads/historical-dissertations/pages-boxplot.png %}

The boxes in this chart show the middle 50 percent of dissertations for
each half decade. We might interpret this as the typical range for most
dissertations. Even typical dissertations fluctuate in length, so that
the low end of typical can be 70 pages shorter than median, and the high
end of typical can be 50 or 60 pages more than median. But many
dissertations come in shorter, and there is a very high upper bound to
the maximum length of dissertations.

Next up, I'll compare the typical length of dissertations for the
academy as a whole to the length of dissertations at specific
universities.

In summary, what does this data about page lengths say about history
dissertations? It says that your adviser was right when she said that
the dissertation will be done when you've written what you need to
write.

* * * * *

Some caveats: There are definitely errors in the data, for example, a
six page dissertation from Princeton advised by Robert Darnton. (Sweet
deal, if you can get it.) But there are only 215 dissertations with
fewer than 100 pages, and only 53 dissertations with more than 1500
pages, so I don't think these errors skew the data that much. Though it
is scarcely believable, the dissertations above 1500 are probably not
all errors, either. Another problem is that we're dealing with number of
pages rather than word counts, and the number of words per page
presumably changes with different writing technologies. (The definition
of a word, on the other hand, is stable and timeless, even eternal.)
Fortunately the timebound and hideous formatting requirements that
universitites impose on dissertations probably keep this variation in
check.

**Mean and Median Length of History Dissertations, 1945--2012**

    year   mean   median
  ------ ------ --------
    1945    324      319
    1946    301      296
    1947    400      329
    1948    366      314
    1949    358      311
    1950    306      282
    1951    375      348
    1952    370      364
    1953    372      335
    1954    361      338
    1955    362      338
    1956    362      340
    1957    371      348
    1958    384      369
    1959    369      338
    1960    372      343
    1961    360      332
    1962    350      326
    1963    350      330
    1964    357      331
    1965    347      319
    1966    351      324
    1967    349      328
    1968    348      327
    1969    344      322
    1970    353      326
    1971    351      323
    1972    344      318
    1973    352      326
    1974    360      331
    1975    361      334
    1976    364      338
    1977    367      341
    1978    362      328
    1979    369      342
    1980    373      344
    1981    383      350
    1982    388      356
    1983    383      353
    1984    385      358
    1985    393      354
    1986    386      348
    1987    386      356
    1988    389      353
    1989    386      353
    1990    384      350
    1991    380      347
    1992    377      347
    1993    381      346
    1994    372      339
    1995    354      327
    1996    350      322
    1997    353      326
    1998    354      327
    1999    351      325
    2000    354      327
    2001    350      324
    2002    350      325
    2003    343      318
    2004    340      317
    2005    343      316
    2006    339      311
    2007    346      316
    2008    337      313
    2009    332      308
    2010    334      311
    2011    330      310
    2012    331      306
    2013    333      311

  [history dissertations were the longest]: http://beckmw.wordpress.com/2013/04/15/how-long-is-the-average-dissertation/
  [varied quite a bit]: http://rpubs.com/benmschmidt/princetonhistorydiss
