---
layout: post
title: "Analyzing Historical History Dissertations: Limitations of the Data"
date: 2014-02-08 10:01
categories: 
- r-language
- digital-humanities
- historical-dissertations
---

After my post yesterday about [historical history dissertations][],
[Yoni Appelbaum][] sent me some useful questions about the completeness
and accuracy of the data. I've had my own questions about exactly what
data I am working with, and what are its limitations. The difficulty
with a reasonably large data set like this one is that it is easier to
know something about the data in aggregate than any of the particulars.

The main question boils down to this: why does the data from ProQuest
have 84,428 dissertations about history (based on the filters I
described earlier) when the AHA's *[Directory of History
Dissertations][]* contains "29,421 dissertations that were completed or
are currently in progress at 194 academic departments in Canada and the
United States"?

The answer is that the AHA data is based on dissertations completed
within history departments. Those dissertations also have to be reported 
to the AHA, perhaps by the authors themselves, but usually by member 
history departments. The ProQuest data, as far as I can tell, comes from 
reports by universities to ProQuest, as well as retrospective data entry 
from sources like Dissertations Abstracts International and UMI. It 
contains data from many departments, with subject fields that describe 
the content of the dissertation. I'm filtering the data set to get only 
disserations that match these subjects. 

{% highlight r %}
historical_subjects <- c("Art History.",
                         "Biography.",
                         "Economics, History.",
                         "Education, History of.",
                         "History of Science.",
                         "History, African.",
                         "History, Ancient.",
                         "History, Asia, Australia and Oceania.",
                         "History, Black.",
                         "History, Canadian.",
                         "History, Church.",
                         "History, European.",
                         "History, General.",
                         "History, History of Oceania.",
                         "History, Latin American.",
                         "History, Medieval.",
                         "History, Middle Eastern.",
                         "History, Military.",
                         "History, Modern.",
                         "History, Russian and Soviet.",
                         "History, United States.",
                         "History, World History.",
                         "Religion, History of.")
{% endhighlight %}

So while I'm not selecting, for example, American Studies dissertations 
as a whole, I am getting American Studies dissertations that someone 
judged to be history. This certainly leads to some fuzziness, but I 
think it also gives a fuller picture about the writing of history. In 
other words, the AHA data is probably better for answering questions
about professional academic historians in history departments; the
ProQuest data is probably better for answering questions about writing
about history (or the past) across the academy.

But there is another question: is the ProQuest data tolerably complete?
I suspect, given the very low numbers of dissertations before the 1950s,
that the data is patchy and unreliable before that time. (For example, I
didn't find W. E. B. Du Bois's 1896 dissertation in either data set.)
Other than that, I'm not sure how to answer the question definitively.
But I was curious to see whether the two data sets contained the
dissertations by faculty affiliated with [my own department][]. This
kind of spot check is only suggestive, of course. Leaving out two
faculty with dissertations after 2012, and four faculty with PhDs from
British universities, I came up with the following table.

  Faculty                  In ProQuest   In AHA   Year
  ------------------------ ------------- -------- ------
  Antler, Joyce            yes           yes      1977
  Donahue, Brian           yes           no       1995
  Engerman, David          yes           yes      1998
  Fischer, David Hackett   no            no       
  Freeze, ChaeRan          yes           no       1997
  Freeze, Gregory          yes           no       1972
  Hang, Xing               yes           yes      2010
  Hansen, Karen            yes           no       1989
  Hopper, Ian              yes           yes      2011
  Hulliung, Mark L.        no            no       
  James, Heyward Parker    yes           no       2001
  Kamensky, Jane           yes           yes      1993
  Kapelle, William E.      no            no       
  Reinharz, Jehuda         yes           no       1972
  Sarna, Jonathan D.       yes           yes      1979
  Sheppard, Eugene         yes           yes      2001
  Sohrabi, Nagmeh          yes           no       2005
  Sreenivasan, Govind      yes           yes      1995
  Williams, Chad           yes           yes      2004
  Willrich, Michael        yes           yes      1997

Dissertations by three faculty did not show up in either data set. I
don't have exact dates that those faculty graduated, but all three are
from the 1960s or 1970s. Otherwise, the ProQuest data set contained all
of the Brandeis faculty. The AHA data set, on the other hand, missed 7
additional dissertations out of 20. Those 7 dissertations are all what I
would call history dissertations, though a few of them were written in
non-history departments.

In sum, I think the ProQuest data is sketchy before the 1950s, but at
least as reliable as the AHA data after the 1950s, taking into account a
much broader definition of what counts as a history dissertation.

  [historical history dissertations]: http://lincolnmullen.com/blog/analyzing-historical-history-dissertations-beginnings/
  [Yoni Appelbaum]: https://twitter.com/YAppelbaum
  [Directory of History Dissertations]: https://secure.historians.org/pubs/dissertations/index.cfm
  [my own department]: http://www.brandeis.edu/departments/history/
