---
date: '2014-01-28 15:07'
layout: post
title: The Return of the Longuee Duree in American Religious History
...

David Armitage of Harvard and Jo Guldi have written an article for
*Annales* which I think will make itself known on syllabi across history
departments this fall. Armitage and Guldi argue that history not only
can but must return to the *longue duree*. Such has long been my sense
when it comes to American Religious History. Some of the empirical work
has been done in Ben Schmidt's post on what historians studied.

I'm only going to mention good books, in these categories.

Let me mention longuee duree books, of an older period.

Conkin's American Originals, if not properly a longuee duree book . The
granddaddy of longuee duree books is Sydney Ahlstrom's Religious History
of the American Book. (For me this book represents a turning point, not
just because I like to think of Ahlstrom [who died the year that I was
born] as by Doktorgrossvatar, because it represents both an attempt to
synthesize everything and the apparent judgment of American religious
historians that such a synthesis could not be completed.)

Cultural histories got shorter. (Again, I'm only mentioning books that I
love.) Paul Johnson's A Shopkeeper's Millennium () looked at a few
years.

We could look at some of the best books being published. Kevin Schultz's
Tri-Faith America has an short period, as to a lesser extent, .

Kambiz GhaneaBassiri's Islam in America, Jonathan Sarna's American
Judaism, Jim O'Toole's The Faithful, Cathy Albanese's Republic of Mind
and Spirit. Now there is definitely a career element here: for the most
part these are sweeping books by scholars at the height, not the
beginning of their careers. We could add to this cultural histories.
Histories of Jesus have long been popular, and Paul Harvey and Ed Blum's
recent *Color of Christ* has gained a lot of attention in part because
it tries to synthesize the history of race across several religious
traditions, but also because it does so over the full sweep of American
religious history (and where that attention is critical, it's because of
the longuee duree element). American Christianities, by Gilip and {FACT}
also has a longish period, though it is comprised of a number of shorter
elements.

This is part of a larger need, which I've been arguing for a long time,
that what American religious history needs is synthesis. That's a topic
perhaps I'll have to return to in a another statement. Briefly put, I
think there are so many different kinds of religion that get treated on
their own, and these must be brought together as historians have been
calling for since the 1997s books.

That's why American religious history too often lapses into a
simplisitic argument that American religion was "diverse," with no
meaningful attempt at figuring out was central and peripheral. While I'm
extraordinarily grateful for the history that has been written from the
margins. Still history which has no argument but diversity seems
fundamentally an exercise in recovering denominational traditions rather
than an exercise in history, when by history I mean the inquiry into the
structures and changes in events.

Part of this is the experience of graduate students who either borrow
from or are dependent on history departments and broader intellectual
trends.

Part of this is inertia on the part of the profession: graduate students
and early career scholars are the most conservative, despite the fact
that that's the only way to guarantee that you're invisible to job
committees. Failure to pick up on digital methodologies. \*\*

What I think what we have is a failure of nerve by graduate students and
early career scholars. Who have been writing dissertations on how four
theologians read the bible then shortening it to three.

Since this is a somewhat tendentious critique of the state of the field,
I should mention that my dissertation, which tries to incorporate
Protestant, Native American, African American, Jewish, and Catholic ,
and irreligious history into one, and which runs from the American
revolution to the publication of William James's *Varieties of Religious
Experience* in 1902.

I think that

Now that I've argued about where I think the field is. Gentle readers,
do you detect the same change in American religious history from longuee
duree to short duree back to the longue duree? What great work do you
see moving in the field?

-   Full disclosure: my dissertation adviser

\*\* In the long run, though, I think that it will be people who can
combine the archive with broad reading who are going to do best.
