---
date: '2014-05-12 13:00'
layout: post
title: Mapping the Spread of American Slavery
categories: 
 - Smithsonian
...

*[A revised version of this post [was published at Smithsonian.com][].]*

  [was published at Smithsonian.com]: http://www.smithsonianmag.com/history/maps-reveal-slavery-expanded-across-united-states-180951452/

In September of 1861, the U.S. Coast Survey published a [large map][],
just under three feet square, titled a "Map showing the distribution of
the slave population of the southern states of the United States." Based
on the population statistics gathered in the 1860 census, and certified
by the superintendent of the Census Office, the map depicted the
percentage of the population enslaved in each county.

{% figure slavery-map/hergesheimer-map png "U.S. Coast Survey, *Map showing the distribution of the slave population of the southern states of the United States* (Washington, DC: Henry S. Graham, 1861). Image from the [Library of Congress][large map]." %}

The map showed at a glance the large-scale patterns of slavery in the
American South: the concentrations of slavery in eastern Virginia, in
South Carolina, and most of all along the Mississippi. It also repaid
closer examination, since each county was labeled with the exact
percentage enslaved. The map of slavery was one of many [thematic
maps][] produced in the nineteenth century United States. As Susan
Schulten [has shown][], this particular map was used by the federal
government during the Civil War, and it was a favorite of Abraham
Lincoln's.[^1]

{% figure slavery-map/hergesheimer-inset png "A detail from the U.S.  Coast Survey map of slavery, showing the Mississippi River and delta." %}

Though such thematic maps, in particular of slavery, have their origins
in the nineteenth century, the technique is useful for historians. As I
see it, one of the main problems for the historians' method today is the
problem of scale. How can we understand the past at different
chronological and geographical scales? How can we move intelligibly
between looking at individuals and looking at the Atlantic World,
between studying a moment and studying several centuries?[^2] Maps can
help, especially interactive web maps that make it possible to zoom in
and out, to represent more than one subject of interest, and to set
representations of the past in motion in order to show change over time.

I have created an [interactive map][] of the spread of slavery in the
United States from 1790 to 1860.[^3] Using Census data available from
the [NHGIS][], the visualization shows the population of slaves, of free
African Americans, of all free people, and of the entire United States.
It also shows those subjects as population densities and percentages of
the population.[^4] For any given variable, the scales are held constant
from year to year so that the user can see change over time. You can
[use the map for yourself][interactive map], and I've also written
briefly about what the map shows below.[^5] Historians have of course
often made use of maps of slavery, in particular maps based on the
Census, in support of their arguments. What I've tried to do in this
interactive map is make it possible for users (including me) to explore
the census data in support of making historical arguments.[^6]

<figure id='figure-screenshot'> 
<a onclick="ga('send', 'event', { 
'eventCategory': 'Visualization', 'eventAction': 'View', 'eventLabel': 
'slavery-map/visualization-screenshot'});" 
href='http://lincolnmullen.com/projects/slavery/'><img 
src='/figures/slavery-map/visualization-screenshot.png' alt='Screenshot 
of the interactive map of slavery'></a>
<figcaption> 
Screen shot of the
<a onclick="ga('send', 'event', { 'eventCategory': 'Visualization', 
'eventAction': 'View', 'eventLabel': 
'slavery-map/visualization-screenshot'});" 
href="http://lincolnmullen.com/projects/slavery/">interactive map of
U.S. slavery</a>.
</figcaption></figure>

The first thing to observe is that slavery spread more than it grew. The
population of slaves in 1790 or 1800 was already very high compared the
maximum population levels.[^7] In fact, in Charleston County, South
Carolina (one of the counties with the highest populations of slaves)
the number of enslaved people in 1860 was only 63% of what it had been
in 1840. This is not to say that the total number of slaves in the
eastern seaboard states did not go up over time. But the number of
enslaved people in a particular place did not grow at anything like the
rate of free people in the north. The free population in the north both
grew in the same place and spread to the west. The slave population had
a different dynamic. It grew in intensity in places around the
Chesapeake bay, even as slavery was gradually abolished in the North.
But primarily the slave population spread to the fertile crescent of
lands in Georgia, Alabama, and Mississippi, and most of all to the
Mississippi River valley. Below you can see two animations of the
density of the slave population and the density of the total population
(keep in mind that the scales are different). What you see in these maps
is the spread of slavery through the domestic slave trade.[^8] You also
see the origins of the sectional crisis in the continual expansion of
slavery.

{% figure slavery-map/animation-slave-density gif "An animation of the density of slave population from 1790 to 1860. Notice that slavery spreads more than it grows. Taken from the [interactive map][]." %}

{% figure slavery-map/animation-population-density gif "An animation of density of the total population from 1790 to 1860. Notice that population in the north both grows in place and spreads westward. Taken from the [interactive map][]." %}

Another observation to make about slavery in the United States is what
an extraordinarily high percentage of the population was enslaved. The
majority slave populations of the Chesapeake, the South Carolina and
Georgia coast were soon duplicated in the majority slave populations of
the Mississippi River valley.

{% figure slavery-map/animation-slave-percentage gif "An animation of the percentage of the population enslaved from 1790 to 1860. Taken from the [interactive map][]." %}

A striking way to see the importance of slavery is to look at a map of
the total free population: a photo negative, if you will, of slavery.
When looking at the density of the population that was free, large
swathes of the South appear virtually depopulated. (Perhaps this is what
a history book looks like that fails to take includes slaves?)

{% figure slavery-map/total-free-1860 png "The population density of all free persons in 1860. Taken from the [interactive map][]." %}

Finally, the dynamics of the free African American population looked
more like the free white population than the slave population. The Free
African American population seems to have primarily settled along the
Eastern seaboard and especially in the cities of the northern United
States. Free African Americans were almost entirely excluded from most
of the deep South, except the cities.

{% figure slavery-map/animation-free gif "An animation of the free African American population from 1790 to 1860. Taken from the [interactive map][]." %}

Historians have long used maps of slavery to advance their
arguments.[^9] I hope this map finds some use in making more arguments
about the history of slavery, and especially for helping students to
grasp the big picture of the "peculiar institution" which made the
nation "half slave and half free."[^10]

[^1]: See Susan Schulten, *Mapping the Nation: History and Cartography
    in Nineteenth-Century America* (Chicago: University of Chicago
    Press, 2012), especially chapter 4 on slavery and statistical
    cartography. Also see the book's [companion website][], which
    includes many [images of maps of slavery][].

[^2]: For one discussion of the problem of scale, see David Armitage and
    Jo Guldi. "[Le Retour de la longue durée: Une perspective
    anglo-saxonne][]," *Annales*, in press. Whatever the reason for the
    blockbuster success of Thomas Picketty's *Capital in the
    Twenty-First Century*, it's worth noting that the book is primarily
    a *longue durée* history of the structure of capital.

[^3]: I am grateful for suggestions from [Yoni Appelbaum][], [John
    Hannigan][], and [Caleb McDaniel][], who each looked at the map in
    development, though they will each find more things they wished were
    different.

[^4]: You might think of the visualization as 88 maps = 8 decades ✕ 11
    variables.

[^5]: The map represents a lot of data, and I have not been able to make
    it snappy enough for my satisfaction, particularly for mobile
    devices. Hence the animated GIFs below.

[^6]: Of course there is far more to the history of slavery than just
    the Census data, which alone cannot answer any of the interpretative
    questions that historians have asked.

[^7]: This is remarkable given that in the Revolution many slaves
    escaped to or with the British army.

[^8]: Steven Deyle writes, "I believe it is safe to conclude that
    between 1820 and 1860 at least 875,000 American slaves were forcibly
    removed from the Upper South to the Lower South, and that between 60
    and 70 percent of these individuals were transported via the
    interregional slave trade." Steven Deyle, *Carry Me Back: The
    Domestic Slave Trade in American Life* (New York: Oxford University
    Press, 2005), 289.

[^9]: Perhaps I will provide a few examples in a future post.

[^10]: From Abraham Lincoln's "[House Divided][]" speech: "Either the
    opponents of slavery, will arrest the further spread of it, and
    place it where the public mind shall rest in the belief that it is
    in the course of ultimate extinction; or its advocates will push it
    forward, till it shall become alike lawful in all the States, old as
    well as new---North as well as South."

  [large map]: http://memory.loc.gov/cgi-bin/map_item.pl?data=/home/www/data/gmd/gmd386/g3861/g3861e/cw0013200.jp2&style=gmd&itemLink=r?ammem/gmd:@field(NUMBER+@band(g3861e+cw0013200))&title=Map%20showing%20the%20distribution%20of%20the%20slave%20population%20of%20the%20southern%20states%20of%20the%20United%20States.%20%20Compiled%20from%20the%20census%20of%201860%20Drawn%20by%20E.%20Hergesheimer.%20Engr.%20by%20Th.%20Leonhardt.
  [thematic maps]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thematic_map
  [has shown]: http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/022610396X/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=022610396X&linkCode=as2&tag=thebacgla-20&linkId=SIPUV2SKCZMZALQP
  [interactive map]: http://lincolnmullen.com/projects/slavery/
  [NHGIS]: https://www.nhgis.org/
  [companion website]: http://www.mappingthenation.com/
  [images of maps of slavery]: http://www.mappingthenation.com/index.php/chapter/index/4
  [Le Retour de la longue durée: Une perspective anglo-saxonne]: http://scholar.harvard.edu/armitage/publications/return-longue-dur%C3%A9e
  [Yoni Appelbaum]: https://twitter.com/YAppelbaum
  [John Hannigan]: https://twitter.com/jhannigan
  [Caleb McDaniel]: http://wcm1.web.rice.edu/
  [House Divided]: http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/aia/part4/4h2934t.html
