---
layout: post 
title: "Sacred Book, Sacred Space: My Attempt to Buy a Qur’an" 
category: essays 
introduction: "This essay was originally published at Religion in America."
---

Yesterday afternoon, I tried to buy a Qur’an. I used to own two copies
of the Qur’an (or, to be precise, a translation of the meaning of the
Qur’an). One I bought as a textbook, and read, and one was mailed to me
by Muslims trying to proselytize, but a search of my bookcases and attic
revealed that neither copy had survived recent relocations. And so, I
walked to the center of town to buy another copy.

I’m not the only person in the market for a Qur’an this week. According
to Amazon, the [Oxford World’s Classics
edition](http://www.amazon.com/Quran-Oxford-Worlds-Classics/dp/0199535957/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&s=books&qid=1284135285&sr=8-1)
is currently at 72 and climbing in their bestsellers list, meaning that
Amazon is selling a lot of Qur’ans. Demand is being spurred by two
related events: plans to build an Islamic community center in New York
City, and plans to burn Qur’ans in Gainesville, Florida.

The two controversies are mirror images of each other—not exactly so,
but near enough. In the one, Muslims plan to build a community center
that an overwhelming majority of evangelical Christians oppose. Many
[defend Muslims’ First Amendment
right](http://religioninamerica.org/2010/08/10/religious-liberty-and-the-islamic-community-center/)
to the free exercise of their religion and fair use of their private
property, while questioning the wisdom of trying to build near Ground
Zero. In the other, evangelical Christians plan to burn the Qur’ans on
September 11 (also the last day of Ramadan), an action opposed by all
Muslims and, one hopes, a majority of Americans. It’s pretty clear that
the Qur’an burning is protected speech under the First Amendment, and in
any case it cannot be prevented in advance, but many have decried the
insult to Muslims and the potential danger to U.S. troops overseas. Both
cases are linked by the problem of the sacred and the problem of
pluralism.

The sacred is enlisted in both controversies. The chief argument
advanced against building the Islamic community center is that Ground
Zero is a sacred, a claim [some 56% of Americans
believe](http://www.publicreligion.org/research/?id=358). Ground Zero’s
alleged sacredness is not the sacredness of a church, but something
between the sacredness of a roadside shrine for a car accident and that
of a battlefield. Like the shrine, Ground Zero is sacred to the cult of
the victims, and it has an out-and-about, everyday kind of sacredness.
But the more apt comparison is to a battlefield. Officially, according
to Presidents Bush and Obama, the war is the American people against
terrorism. It would be naive, though, to miss that many Americans are
fighting or wish to fight a different war: one that pits a bastard mix
of Christianity and American [civil
religion](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Civil_religion) against global
Islam.

[Terry
Jones](http://onfaith.washingtonpost.com/onfaith/panelists/sally_quinn/2010/09/the_notorious_pastor_terry_jones.html),
pastor of Dove World Outreach Center in Gainesville, is just one of
those Americans. Had he not been the one to receive the media’s
attention, doubtless someone else would have gotten it. Calling his
threat to burn the Qur’an on September 11 a publicity stunt misses the
point, though. Jones is doubtless after publicity, but his beliefs and
his hate are sincere; the media amplifies them, but it did not create
them. Jones’s plan is to desecrate the Qur’an by burning it, a double
insult to Islam, on the one hand, and to rational secularists who regard
books as sacred. (Librarians and intellectuals regularly protest book
burning.) Yet the act of burning a Qur’an is, in a way, an inadvertent
acknowledgment that it is sacred. Before an object can be *desecrated*,
it must first be *sacred*. It is the boundary that gives meaning to the
transgression, and the transgression is the most visible acknowledgement
that a boundary exists.

These controversies over a sacred space and a sacred book raise the
question: How does an open society like the United States deal with the
problem of multiple religions?

The answer, in a word, is pluralism. Pluralism is not the vague notion
that all religions are the same. That idea, propounded by both the
religious and the irreligious, is an insult to all religions, for it
ignores the actual meaning of their beliefs and practices and reduces
them to a set of platitudes. Pluralism, rather, acknowledges that
[religions are different and
irreconciliable](http://www.amazon.com/God-Not-One-World-Differences/dp/006157127X/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&s=books&qid=1284135641&sr=8-1),
that their practitioners will frequently be at odds, and that they have
every right to attempt to proselytize the other. Yet pluralism makes
room within society for multiple religions. Making room is, in one
sense, dependent on law. The state provides ordered liberty–the
protection of rights and the maintenance of order. It is for this reason
that the Apostle Paul wrote that rulers are [“the ministers of
God”](http://www.esvonline.org/Rom+13/) who are “not a terror to good
conduct, but to bad” and commanded Christians to pray for rulers “[that
we may lead a peaceful and quiet
life](http://www.esvonline.org/1%20Timothy%202/), godly and dignified in
every way.” But making room is, in another sense, dependent not on legal
restrictions [but on voluntarily
restrictions](http://www.usatoday.com/news/opinion/forum/2010-09-09-kidd09_ST_N.htm?loc=interstitialskip).
It may be legal to burn a Qur’an, but it is wrong by the code of an open
society and by the imperatives of the gospel. There’s a saying that your
right to swing your arms ends where my nose begins. If that’s the case,
then it’s also true that my right to profane ends where your sense of
the sacred begins.

Pluralism of this type works when allegiance to the state does not
conflict with allegiance to religion. In other words, it works when I
can be both Christian and American, and you can be a Muslim and an
American, without violating our religious conscience to maintain our
political loyalty. The problem in both cases is that religious loyalties
and political loyalty are confused because of American civil religion, a
syncretistic, quasi-Judeo-Christian political religion intended to
promote loyalty to the state.
[Protestant-Catholic-Jew](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Will_Herberg#Protestant.2C_Catholic.2C_Jew),
to borrow Will Herberg’s phrase, may have equal right to claim
Americanness, but Muslims have not yet been welcomed into the cult of
civil religion . In both the case of the community center and the
Qur’an-burning, *the conflict is not primarily between Islam and
Christianity, but between Islam and American civil religion*. This is
apparent from the choice of Ground Zero and September 11 as holy space
and holy day, respectively, and in the patterns of opposition to the
community center as desecration, strongest among Christians but claiming
a broader following. A genuine pluralism cannot exist where a civil
religion superimposes itself on religious and political loyalty.

That is why I tried to buy a Qur’an yesterday. Reading about other
religions is hardly a panacea, but it’s a better step than burning them.
I had to resort to Amazon, though, because my attempt to buy a Qur’an at
a bookstore failed. The religion section of one used bookstore held a
dozen Bibles and even a Tanakh, but no Qur’an. The other bookstore was
closed, ironically enough, for Rosh Hashanah.
