---
layout: page
title: Teaching
---

### Programming for Historians

<a href="/files/clio3.syllabus.hist698.2014f.pdf" onclick="ga('send', 
'event', { 'eventCategory': 'PDF', 'eventAction': 'Download', 
'eventLabel': 'clio3.syllabus.hist698.2014f.pdf', 'page': 
'/files/clio3.syllabus.hist698.2014f.pdf' });">Syllabus</a> | George
Mason University, fall 2014

<div class="abstract">

This course will teach you have to use computer programming for research
in history. The focus is on gaining familiarity with several languages
in order to understand their underlying principles, and on connecting
programming methods to specific problems that historians want to solve.
Our first major section will be on data analysis, in which you will use
the R language to analyze historical data both quantitatively and
geographically. You will also learn how researchers structure,
manipulate, and clean their data. Our next major section will be on
scripting for research, using Ruby to access APIs and scrape web
documents. Then we will use Ruby to create our own simple web
applications and to interact with relational databases. Finally we will
move on from Ruby to PHP, a commonly used language for web applications
like Omeka and WordPress. No previous experience with programming is
required, but students are strongly encouraged to have already taken
Clio 1 and Clio 2.

</div>

### Church and State in America

George Mason University, fall 2014

<div class="abstract">

Two of the most pressing questions about American religion and its
public role are intertwined: how should religions relate to one another,
and how should religions relate to the state? In this class you will
take up these questions by studying the interactions of Protestant,
Catholic, Jewish, Mormon, and Native American religions with one another
and with the federal and state governments. You will investigate how law
has regulated the public sphere and the civil square in which religious
interactions take place, but also how religious actors have driven those
interactions. We will read primary and secondary sources about the
American Revolution and disestablishment, moral reform, temperance, and
abolition, polygamy, the school system, pacifism, civil rights, and
political movements, ranging from the late eighteenth to the late
twentieth century.

</div>

### Mapping Boston's Religions: A Digital History Seminar

<a href="/files/religion-19c-dh.pdf" onclick="ga('send', 'event', { 
'eventCategory': 'PDF', 'eventAction': 'Download', 'eventLabel': 
'religion-19c-dh.pdf', 'page': '/files/religion-19c-dh.pdf' 
});">Syllabus</a> | [Course Project][] | Brandeis University, spring
2014

<div class="abstract">

In this course you will read the writings of the many individuals and
groups that lived out their religion in the nineteenth-century United
States: the alliance of skeptics and believers who supported
disestablishment; Baptist and Methodists revivalists; Catholic priests,
missionaries, and animists; founders of new religions such as Mormonism
and Christian Science; Reform and Orthodox Jews; African-Americans;
metaphysicians; liberal and conservative Protestants; agnostics and
atheists. We will make sense of that diversity by asking and answering a
set of unifying questions: How did mainstream and minority faiths relate
to one another, especially in the public sphere? How did people
experience religion in their everyday lives? How did religious people
change laws and society? How did new forms of religious expression
develop? How were new religions founded? How were religions imported
from Europe, Asia, Africa, and South America, and how did those
religions adapt? How did Americans become more religious and more
secular at the same time? The centerpiece of this class will be a
digital history project: you will do your own original research into
nineteenth-century sources to make a digital map of religion in Boston
over the nineteenth century. Creating this project will teach you the
skills of a historian---researching, writing, analyzing---and will let
you put what you'll learn in this class to work on the ground. In this
history class as shop class, you'll also learn digital and project
skills---publishing, mapping, encoding, collaborating, communicating,
managing---that are widely useful in government, business, and research
outside the academy.

</div>

### Religious Pluralism and the American State

<a href="/files/religious-pluralism.syllabus.2012-fall.pdf" 
onclick="ga('send', 'event', { 'eventCategory': 'PDF', 'eventAction': 
'Download', 'eventLabel': 'religious-pluralism.syllabus.2012-fall.pdf', 
'page': '/files/religious-pluralism.syllabus.2012-fall.pdf' 
});">Syllabus</a> | Brandeis University, fall 2012

<div class="abstract">

Two of the most pressing questions about American religion and its
public role are intertwined: how should religions relate to one another,
and how should religions relate to the state? In this class you will
take up these two questions through the historical analysis of texts
about the interactions of Protestant, Catholic, Jewish, Mormon, and
Native American religions with one another and with the federal and
state governments. You will investigate how law has regulated the public
sphere and the civil square in which religious interactions take place,
but also how religious actors have driven those interactions. We will
trace the history of American pluralism, from the fact of diversity in
eighteenth century to the idea of pluralism in the twenty-first century.
Because this is a writing seminar, you will write three essays: one
expositing a document about a religious conflict, a second interacting
with other historians' interpretations, and a third based on original
research into religious conflict.

</div>

  [Course Project]: http://omeka.lts.brandeis.edu/neatline/fullscreen/mapping-bostons-religions
