---
title: "RRCHNM welcomes 25 graduate students for the new academic year"
date: "2022-08-26"
slug: 'rrchnm-welcomes-new-graduate-students'
tags:
- RRCHNM
draft: true
external: 
  url: "https://rrchnm.org/about-rrchnm/rrchnm-welcomes-25-graduate-students-for-the-new-academic-year/"
  name: RRCHNM
---

The start of the academic year at RRCHNM also means the return of many
of our graduate students. This week RRCHNM welcomed [twenty-five
graduate research assistants or graduate
affiliates](https://rrchnm.org/our-people/).

{{< figure src="first-day-rrchnm.jpg" caption="RRCHNM on the first day of classes." >}}

Graduate students are a critical part of the work that RRCHNM creates,
and RRCHNM is in turn core to the experience of many of the graduate
students in [GMU's Department of History and Art
History](https://historyarthistory.gmu.edu/){target="_blank"
rel="noreferrer noopener"}.

A number of the graduate students at RRCHNM are graduate research
assistants. As a part of their PhD fellowship from GMU, they work on
RRCHNM projects. Coming alongside our faculty and staff, GRAs are full
part of project teams. They contribute their expertise on both the
subject matter of our projects and on the digital history skills that go
into making them. While participating in the projects they learn from
the faculty and staff and quickly move from being research assistants in
name to research collaborators in fact. Our alumni from RRCHNM take what
they have learned to become digital historians in libraries, museums,
businesses, research centers, and academic departments.

The kinds of work that GRAs do at RRCHNM can be quite varied. For
example, one GRA is working on writing and producing episodes for [The
Green Tunnel
podcast](https://greentunnel.rrchnm.org/){rel="noreferrer noopener"
target="_blank"} about the history of the Appalachian Trail. Two GRAs
are working with our partners at the National Museum of African American
History and Culture to create a digital archive from the collections of
five HBCUs. Two other GRAs are contributing to large-scale projects to
turn historical collections into datasets. And two first-year GRAs are
working on [World History
Commons](https://worldhistorycommons.org/){target="_blank"
rel="noreferrer noopener"} to create educational resources and lesson
plans for K--12 teachers, parents, and students.

Graduate students also are a part of RRCHNM to work on research projects
that they start and lead themselves. Our graduate research
affiliates---who are MA or PhD students in history or art history, as
well as in related disciplines---benefit from the mentoring of RRCHNM's
staff and faculty. We currently have three working groups---on public
history, spatial history, and data analysis---meeting regularly
throughout the year to discuss works in progress and new publications on
these topics. We regularly offer a series on "Basics of" where people at
RRCHNM offer one another introductions to podcasting, educational
resources, community engagement, various technologies, and so-called
"soft skills" such as budgeting, project management. The graduate
students themselves also form a community for peer mentoring.

The research projects that graduate students at RRCHNM create lead the
field of digital history as much as any of the work by our faculty and
staff. PhD students at GMU were the first to create born-digital
dissertations. Our affiliates regularly present their research at
academic conferences and publish their projects online. A number of our
current affiliates are working on digital dissertations that combine
visualizations, maps, databases, or public engagement with the prose
more typically associated with dissertations.

To most people, RRCHNM is associated with the digital projects that we
create and make freely available online.Â  Those online projects are the
most visible part of RRCHNM. But another key part of our work is
educating students to do digital history so that they can in turn
achieve our mission---to democratize history. And that is work we have
been doing for decades.
